"Great king, I shall tell you the way Sanatkumara, great among the celestials further narrated the story. Listen to my words which may prove useful to you (said Sumantra)".



That king (Dasaratha) will develop friendship with the king of Anga. A highly virtuous daughter named Santa will be born to king of Anga.

The famous king Dasaratha will approach the son of the king of Anga known as Romapada.

O righteous king I am issueless. Let Rsyasringa, husband of Santa be ordered to perform the a sacrificial ceremony so that I shall be blessed with I son for the perpetuaion of my race.

On hearing his words and deeply thinking over the matter, the prudent Romapada agreed to send, Santa's husband (Rsyasringa), capable of blessing him with a son.

The king relieved of his suffering, was highly delighted. He would take the brahmin with him and perform the sacrificial ritual.

King Dasaratha, lord of the people, and knower of dharma and truth, desirous of performing the sacrifice would ask Rsyasringa, with folded palms for granting a boon to perform a sacrifice in order to obtain children and to attain heaven. The king will get those desires fulfilled through that chief brahmin.

Four sons of immense prowess would be born to him bringing glory and fame to their dynasty. They would be renowned in all the worlds.

In early times of Kritayuga, this story was narrated by the holy and competent Sanatkumara, the great one among the devatas".

"Greatest among men, O king, along with vehicles and retinue, you may go and bring him (Rsyasringa) personally with due respect".

Having heard the charioteer's words and having obtained the consent of Vasishta, he along with his queens and courtiers departed to the place where the brahmin (Rsyasringa) resided.

Crossing forests and rivers slowly, the king reached the place where that foremost of  ascetics lived.

He reached the spot and saw the son of the ascetic, the best of brahmins glowing like fire seated next to Romapada.

Then the king (Romapada), delighted at heart out of friendship with the king (Dasaratha), offered special hospitality with respectful salutations in accordance with propriety.

Romapada explained his friendship and relationship with him (Dasaratha). Rsyasringa of great intellect in return felicitated Dasaratha.

In this manner, the great among men, the king wellhonoured by Romapada, spent seven or eight days there.And then spoke this to Romapadaः

O lord of people, O king, It has been decided to commence an important sacrificial rite. You may send your daughter Santa along with her husband to my city.

Having agreed to the departure of the sage Romapada said, 'Be pleased to go (to Ayodhya) together with your wife'.

The son of the sage assented to the king's command saying 'So be it'. And permitted by him, departed along with wife (for Ayodhya).

Dasaratha and Romapada, pleased with this, wished each other with folded palms and hugged each other with love.

Then king Dasaratha, took leave of his friend and set out. He despatched swiftfooted messengers to the citizens with the command.

"Let the entire city be welldecorated, perfumed, sprinkled with water and cleaned with flags hoisted."

The people of the city having heard the king's arrival were overjoyed. They did  everything as by the king.

Then the king entered that welldecorated city amidst blares of conches and the beating of drums, with the best of the brahmins (Rsyasringa) in the forefront.

The citizens were delighted to behold that brahmin entering the city duly honoured by the king who was equivalent to Indra in valiance৷৷

He (king Dasaratha) took him in to the inner apartment and extended welcome. He thought that he has as enjoined by the sastras accomplished his objective by bringing him (Rsyasringa).

All the royal ladies, experienced immense delight when they saw the largeeyed Shanta arriving along with her husband in that manner.

Honoured and worshipped by royal ladies, especially by king Dasaratha, Santa dwelt there for some time comfortably with the sage.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे एकादशस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the eleventh sarga of Balakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.