After completion of one year when the sacrificial horse had returned, the sacrifice by the king (Dasaratha) commenced on the northern bank of river Sarayu.

The best of brahmins led by Rsyasringa performed the rituals of aswamedha organised by the exceedingly magnanimous king.

The chief priests, masters of the Vedas, conducted the rituals in consonance with traditions and scriptures. They officiated in conformity with duties laid down in the Vedas and according to law.

Brahmins performed pravargya and upasada and other ceremonies as per the scriptures and traditions.

Thereafter the eminent ascetics, rejoicing in their hearts performed the worship (of celestial beings) and conducted the prescribed rituals starting with morning ablutions etc.

Havis was duly offered to Indra daily. The juice was extracted in the morning by pressing the soma plant. Midday ablutions were performed. All in proper sequence.

Those exceedingly noble and eminent brahmins performed third pressing of the soma, in conformity with the sastras.

There were no omissions in the offerings nor any lappes in the performance. Everything was done through recitation of mantras and in a wholesome way.

During the days (of sacrifice) none felt tired or hungry. There was no brahmin who was not learned or had less than a hundred followers (or disciples).

During that period brahmanas as well as those who have masters, (the sudras), ascetics and monks had enough to eat.

The aged, the sick, women and also children ate there and knew no limit to their enjoyment.

"Give food, give, various kinds of clothes" echoed the organisers. And they (in charge of distribution) did.

There, could be seen day after day heaps of nicely cooked food, looking like mountains.

Men and women who had come from various countries to that sacrifice were entertained with food and drink by the magnanimous (king).

Brahmins having tasted the delicious food cooked in prescribed manner, praised saying "Ah We are fully satisfied. Prosperity to you". Such were the words heard by king Dasaratha.

While brahmins were being served with food by welldressed men, some others wearing pendents studded with shining jewels assisted them.

In the interval between ceremonies, eloquent and sagacious brahmins were engaged in various disputations, desirous of victory.

Every day in that sacrifice brahmins, skilful in rituals, persuaded (by sage Vasishta), performed all their duties as per tradition.

Here (in this sacrificial pavillion), there was none who was not versed in six Vedangas,  not true to vows, not learned in many sastras nor adept in discussions (on sastras).

When the time came to erect sacrificial posts, six posts, each made of bilva, khadira, parni, sleshmataka and two of devadaru wood, with a distance of two outstretched hands between them were erected.

When the time came to erect sacrificial posts, six posts each made of bilva and khadira wood and many made of parni wood along, one of sleshmataka and two of devadaru wood, with a distance of two outstretched hands between them were erected.

All these posts were prepared by knowers of sastras and by those wellversed in the performance of sacrifices. They were decorated with gold to add elegance to the sacrifice.

These twentyone sacrificial posts, each measuring twentyone 'aratni' height, were welldecorated wrapped in a piece of cloth.

All those posts, strong with eight sides and finely finished surfaces, wellcarved by sculptors were duly erected.

Decorated with flowers and sandal paste and covered with cloths, stood the bright sacrificial posts shining like seven sages in the sky.

The sacrificial fireplace was constructed with bricks with standard measurement by brahmins who were experts in the art of measuring land with a string or single strand.

That sacrificial altar of the lion among kings, (Dasaratha), erected by welltrained brahmins was in the shape of the golden winged 'Garuda' it had three ranges and thrice as many fireplaces i.e eighteen in number.

Animals, serpents and birds were kept ready after the sastras intended (for sacrifice) for those respective deities.

When the time came to sacrifice the animals, the chief priests, in accordance with tradition, tied up the horse and all the aquatic animals to the sacrificial posts.

Three hundred animals and the jewel of the horses (from the stables) belonging to king Dasaratha were bound to the sacrificial posts.

Kausalya, with immense glee having gone round and worshipped that horse, severed it with three strokes of scimitar.

Kausalya, in her devotion to duty and with a happy state of mind, passed one night near that horse.

Hota, Adhvaryu and Udgata arranged Mahishi, Parivritti, Vavaata and another woman known as Palakali to touch (keep the company of) the sacrificial horse.

The official priest, highly knowledgeable in scriptures and having restrained senses, removed the marrow from the horse and cooked it according to tradition.

The king at appropriate time and in agreement with the scriptures inhaled the odour of the smoke (from the burnt marrow) and absolved himself of his sins.

The sixteen officiating priests (brahmins) offered all the horse's limbs with prayers as per the customs.

In other sacrifices oblations are offered with branches of a plaksha tree but in Aswamedha a branch of cane creeper is chosen instead.

According to Kalpa sutra, aswamedha in conducted for three days. In the first day, chatushtoma is arranged.

On the second day Ukthya and on the third day Atiraatra were performed. Many sacrifices fixed according to the scriptures were also performed.

Jyotishtoma and Ayuryaga in Atiratra, Abhijit, Viswajit and Aptoryama ceremonies constituting the great sacrifice were performed in the prescribed manner.

In order to promote his dynasty, king Dasaratha gave away eastern region to Hotar, western region to Adhvaryu, southern region to Brahma and northern region to Udgata. These offerings were made in accordance with theprescriptions by Brahma long all.

The king best among men and upholder of his dynasty, having concluded the sacrifice according to law, offered this entire earth as gift to priests.

But all the priests said to the king purged of his sins, "O Lord of men you alone are capable of protecting this earth".

"O ruler of the earth We are constantly engaged in the study of the Vedas. We are not capable of ruling the earth and we cannot do anything with its possession. Give some other charity in lieu of that.

O best of men give us gems or gold or cows or whichever is readily available. We have no use with this earth".

Lord of men, the king having been thus addressed by brahmins who were wellversed in the Vedas, bestowed on them ten hundred thousand cows, a hundred crore of gold coins and four times as much in silver coins.

All the priests collectively offered that wealth to sage Rsyasringa and Vasishta endowed with prudence.

Then those highly pleased brahmins, having distributed that wealth with equity, again said to the king.

Thereafter, with earnestness king Dasaratha bestowed a crore of gold coins to brahmins who had come to see the sacrifice.

Dasaratha then gave his excellent bracelet to a poor brahmin who solicited alms.

When the brahmins were pleased, king Dasaratha who was fond of brahmins bowed to them with his eyes filled with delight.

Brahmins uttered blessings upon the generous king when he prostrated before them  according to procedure.

Sacrifice destroys sins. It leads to heaven. It is incapable of being done by other monarchs. King Dasaratha was very much pleased after performing this great sacrifice.

King Dasaratha then addressing Rsyasringa said "O Adherent of vows you can help the continuity of my race".

Rsyasringa, the best of brahmins, addressing the king said, "O King Let it be. Four sons perpetuating your race will be born to you".  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे चतुर्दशस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the fourteenth sarga of Balakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.