Having heard these wonderful words of Dasaratha, the lion among kings, the brilliant Viswamitra with hair on end repliedः

"O Tiger among kings having been born on earth in an illustrious lineage and initiated by Vasishta, this way (of speaking) befits you. It cannot be any other way.

O Tiger among kings I shall unfold the purpose conceived in my mind. Take a decision and be truthful to your promise.

O best among men for the successful completion of a sacrifice I took up a selfimposed religious observance. Two rakshasas, capable of assuming forms at will, are creating impediments to that sacrifice.

When my sacrifice generally speaking, is nearing completion the powerful and welltrained Maricha and Subahu who are raining streams of blood and flesh upon the altar.

The (solemn) vow for observance of religious rites being thus interrupted, I left that country as an exerted and discouraged man.

O King my mind does not permit me to vent my wrath. The nature of sacrifice is such that I refrain from cursing them.

O tiger among kings it is befitting of you to entrust your eldest son Rama to me who is valiant, young (having sidelocks of hair) and true to his prowess.

Protected by me and by his own divine power, Rama is capable of destroying even those demons causing impediments to the sacrifice.

I will confer upon him, without doubt, a lot of blessings for his wellbeing by which he will attain fame in all the three worlds.

Both of them (Maricha and Subahu) will not be able to withstand Rama in any way. Rama, and Rama alone, is capable of destroying them.

Proud of their strength, the two wicked demons have been noosed by Yama, the god of death. O tiger among kings they are no match for the magnanimous Rama.

"O king it is not proper for you to hesitate because of your paternal affection. You need to know that both the rakshasas will perish. This, I assure you.

I know Rama who is a great soul, true to his prowess and also Vasishta of great lustre and these other sages who have been steadfast in asceticism also know.

O king of kings, if you are seeking the benefits of righteousness, great everlasting  fame in this world, it is fit and proper to give Rama to me.

O Kakustha if your counsellors and all other sages headed by Vasishta give their consent, then only you may relieve Rama.

You should spare your dear son, the lotuseyed Rama, impartial and detached, for ten nights.

O (Dasaratha), descendant of Raghu act in such a manner that the time for my sacrifice is not delayed. Do not indulge in grief. Prosperity to you"

After speaking these words charged with dharma and artha the great sage resplendent Viswamitra fell silent.

Having listened to those auspicious words of Viswamitra, the king among kings, (Dasaratha) experienced intense grief out of fear. He became despondent.

The great king felt shaken off his throne after listening to the words of the sage (Viswamitra) which broke his heart and terribly upset his mind.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे एकोनविंशस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the nineteenth sarga of Balakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.