On hearing the excellent words of Viswamitra, a sage with unimaginable faculty. Rama, the tiger among men (Rama) replied in a, gentle voiceः

"O best of ascetics, I have heard the yakshas possess little prowess. How can a woman who is by gender weak possess the strength of a thousand elephants?

Viswamitra said, "Listen, how she acquired the prowess and strength by virtue of a boon she received.

"In the past there was a powerful and great yaksha by name Suketu. He had no children. So he performed an intense penance following virtuous practices.

Rama the grandsire Brahma was highly gratified and granted to the king of yakshas, the gem of a daughter by name known asTataka.

The illustrious grandsire Brahma granted her the strength of a thousand elephants,  but did not bestow a son on the yaksha.

As she grew up, glowing with youth and beauty she was given in marriage to Sunda, son of Jharjha.

After some time that yakshini gave birth to an unassailable son by name Maricha. Because of a curse, he became a rakshasa (though born of yaksha parentage).

O Rama when Sunda died Tataka along with her son wanted to attack Agastya, the best of sages.

Roaring, she rushed with excitement to devour him. The venerable rishi Agastya saw her approaching him and cursed Maricha to assume form of a demoness.

Mighty angry, Agastya cursed Tataka saying, 'Abandon this form of a great yakshini and assume the terrible figure of a rakshasi, a cannibal with distorted appearance and a hideous countenance'.

Enraged at the curse, senseless, Tataka with anger, has been ravaging this sacred land when Agastya walked.

O Rama for the welfare of cows and brahmins, slay this yakshini who is wicked, extremely cruel and possessing vile prowess.

O son of Raghu's dynasty she is maligned by the curse, and so not a single man in the three worlds except you, is competent to slay this yakshini.

O best among men you need not hate killing a woman. You are a prince. You should serve the interest of the four orders of the society.

Whether cruel or kind, sinful or wrong whatever contributes to the protection of the subjects, should be done by the righteous (king).

This is the eternal law binding those who are appointed to bear the burden of a kingdom. O Kakutstha kill her. She knows no dharma.

O Prince It is heard that in the past Indra slew Manthara, Virochana's daughter who intended to destroy the earth.

'O Rama! In olden times, Kavya, the mother of Sukracharya, the wife of sage Bhrigu, was destroyed by Vishnu determined to destroy Indra.'

O Prince by these magnanimous persons and by great men several unrighteous women were killed for the common good".  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे पञ्चविंशस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the twentyfifth sarga of Balakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.