Thus spoke the two princes to Viswamitra. They were conscious of place and time to speak and capable of conquering enemies.

"O adorable Brahmarshi, we want to know around what time the rakshasas will make their appearance so that the sacrifice can be protected. Let not that moment pass".

The sages (of the asrama) were very pleased. They extolled the princes of Kakustha dynasty, who were eager to fight the rakshasas.

"O sons of Raghu's lineage protect the sacrifice for six nights from today. With the ceremoney initiated, the sage would observe silence said the inmates".

At these words of the sages the illustrious princes got ready to protect the tapovana for six days and six nights without sleep.

The two mighty, heroic archers (Rama and Lakshmana), destroyers of enemies  attended upon the sacrifice in order to protect sage Viswamitra.

Time passed. When the sixth day arrived Rama cautioned Lakshmana to be vigilant.

While he was fracing up for a fight, the fire on the sacrificial altar with the officiating priests and spiritual guides suddenly brightened.

The altar with Viswamitra and the officiating priests, kusa grass, ladles and square  vessels, bundles of sticks and flowers, (used in the sacrificfial fire) got brightened up.

While the sacrifice was being performed in accordance with mantras, a great sound causing fear emerged from the sky.

Like the clouds in the rainy season, the two rakshasas (Maricha and Subahu), covering the sky through their power of illusion, came running (to the sacrificial place).

Maricha and Subahu of fearful appearance arrived with their followers and rained streams of blood (on the sacrificial altar).

Flames rose on the sacrificial altar drenched by the stream of blood. Immediately Rama rushed forward and beheld them in the sky.

Having seen them (Maricha and Subahu) suddenly advancing the lotuseyed Rama gazed at Lakshmana and saidः

"O Lakshmana, behold, by manavaastra I shall chase, like clouds scattered by winds those wicked rakshasas who eat human flesh".

The inflamed Rama hurled the highly powerful and effulgent Manavaastra on the chest of Maricha.

Smitten by that powerful Manavaastra, Maricha was thrown to a full distance of hundred yojanas into the surging high seas.

Having seen Maricha beaten by the power of that coolarrowed astra, thrown to a distance, reeling and lying unconscious, Rama spoke to Lakshmanaः

"O Lakshmana behold this Manavaastra associated with righteousness employing a cool arrow, which carries him away by making him unconscious and yet not taking his life.

"I shall slay these merciless, wicked, doers of sinful acts, destroyers of sacrifices and blood-thirsty _rakshasas_ ".

Then Rama took hold of the celestial, marvellous Agneya weapon and hurled it into the chest of Subahu. Struck, Subahuhe fell down on the ground.

Illustrious and highly generous Rama killed the remaining rakshasas with the Vayavya weapon to the delight of the ascetics.

Having killed the rakshasas, obstructors of sacrifices, Rama was worshipped by the hermits like Indra was honoured in the past when he was victorious.

Thereafter, when the sacrifice was completed, maharshi Viswamitra beholding all the directions bereft of evils, said to Ramaः

"O mightyarmed Rama I am fulfilled. Your father's commands have been executed. O  Illustrious one, Siddhaashrama has proved true to its name".  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे त्रिंशस्सर्गः।।02  Thus ends the thirtieth sarga of Balakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.