There, with their purpose fulfilled the heroes, Rama and Lakshmana, full of joy in their hearts spent the night.

As the night dawned, both the brothers performed the morning rites and approached Viswamitra and other rishis.

Sweettongued, they visited with folded hands the best of ascetics Viswamitra who was shining like a flaming fire and addressed him thus in sweet and generous wordsः

"O tiger among ascetics, we two are at your service. Command whatever you want and we shall execute" it.

Addressed, thus by both of them, Viswamitra ahead of all the sages, spoke to Rama.

"O foremost of men, Janaka, king of Mithila, is performing a great religious sacrifice. We shall go there.

O tiger among men, come along with us. You ought to see there the wonderful jewel of a bow.

O best among men, this bow of immeasurable energy. dreadful and highly lustrous was bestowed on king Janaka by devatas in a sacrificial assembly in the past.

Neither devas, nor gandharvas, nor asuras nor human, are capable of stringing the bow by any means.

Mighty princes and kings have failed to string it, in their attempt to know its strength.

O best of men, O descendent of Kakustha, there you will see the bow that belongs to the magnanimous king of Mithila and the wonderful sacrifice at that place.

O best among men, that excellent bow strong in the middle was offered by king of Mithila, Devarata as well as by all devatas as fruit of the sacrifice.

O Rama, that bow is worshipped in the king's palace as principal deity with various kinds of perfumes, sandal paste, incense and fragrant agaru".

Having spoken thus, Viswamitra, the best of ascetics commenced the onward journey along with the Kakutshas and rishis, taking leave of the deities of the forest.

"(O ascetics of the forest) May you be safe. My purpose has been achieved in this Siddhaashrama. From here I shall go to the Himavanta mountain situated on the  northern bank of Jahnavi" (said Viswamitra).

Thereafter, circumambulating the supreme Siddhasrama with reverence, they (Viswamitra and the princes) commenced their journey in the northern direction.

As Viswamitra, the best of ascetics set out on his journey, expounders of the Vedas followed him, nearly in one hundred carriages.

Birds and beasts living in Siddhaashrama also followed the illustrious maharshi  Viswamitra over a long distance until he sent them back.

The sages travelled a long distance and halted on the bank of Sona at sunset.

The sages who possessed great splendour bathed and offered oblations to fire at sunset and sat in front of Viswamitra.

Rama together with Lakshmana having offered respectful salutations to the sages, sat in front of the sagacious Viswamitra.

Thereafter highly lustrous Rama, the best among men, filled with curiosity enquired of  the great sage Viswamitraः

"O worshipful one, what could be the reason for this region shining with luxuriant groves? I wish to hear from you. You can tell me all about this (region). May it be safe for you"

A sage of excellent vows and rigid austerities, Viswamitra, urged by the words of Rama, described in the midst of rishis the entire story relating to that region.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे एकत्रिंशस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the thirtyfirst sarga of Balakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.