On hearing the words of sagacious Kusanabha, his hundred daughters touched his feet with their heads and saidः

"O king, the allpervading Windgod, having taken recourse to foul means intended to outrage our modesty without and moral compunction.

We have our father who is dear to us. Hence we do not have freedom to choose. You may ask our father if he is willing to give us (in marriage).

As all of us were speaking thus, the sinful Windgod, disregarding our words repeatedly assaulted us.

The deeply religious and highly powerful king, having heard those words of his one hundred exceptional daughters, repliedः

"O daughters you have done a great act of forgiveness of which only the tolerant are capable. By taking a united stand, you have protected the honour of my dynasty.

Whether for women or men forgiveness is an ornament. It is difficult even for gods. For you, daughters, to show it without any difference of opinion is especially hard.

"Forbearance is charity, forbearance is sacrifice, forbearance is truth, forbearance is glory and forbearance is virtue. O daughters, the universe is supported by forbearance".

"O Rama after sending away his daughters, the king endowed with the power of the celestials and wellversed in the art of counselling, consulted his ministers about a suitable person for marriage of his daughters at proper time and place.

At that time a great and virtuous ascetic named Chuli living in celebacy was performing austerities in pursuit of the knowledge of Brahman.

When he was performing austerities, a nymph named Somada, daughter of Urmila, used to serve him. Prosperity to you

Somada rendered her services with devotion and humility. There she lived a religious life. In the might time her spiritual guide was satisfied with her services.

When her services came to a fruition with the passage of time, maharshi Chuli, spoke to herः 'I am pleased with you. What favour shall I do for you? May you be prosperous'

Having perceived that the sage was satisfied, the gandharva who was skilled in speech said exceedingly delighted to the sage in a sweet voice.

Bestowed with the great asceticism and brilliance of a brahmin, you look like Brahma. O righteous one, I desire a son endowed with the ascetic virtues of a brahmin.

I am without a husband, my sire. I am not a wife to any one. Since I have taken refuge in you, you are competent to bestow on me a son with the power of your penance".

Pleased with her, brahmarshi Chuli gave her an excellent son to be wellknown as Brahmadatta born through the will of his mind.

Then king Brahmadatta, son of Somada, lived in the city of Kampilya with great  prosperity like Indra in heaven.

O Rama, then the highly righteous king Kusanabha decided to give his hundred daughters to Brahmadatta".

The lord of the earth, highly powerful king Kusanabha invited Brahmadatta, and gave his hundred daughters in marriage to him with a heart highly pleased.

O son of Raghu's dynasty that king Brahmadatta resembling Indra received the hands of those maidens' in due order.

Thereafter, with the mere touch of his hand, the hundred daughters were cured of their hump back and freed from anguish. They assumed great beauty.

King Kusanabha, having seen his daughters released from disfigurement caused by the Windgod was immensely pleased. He experienced waves of delight.

Then the king along with his queens performed the marriage of his daughters in the assembly of priests and sent them with Brahmadatta (to his kingdom).

Somada the gandharvi was exeedingly delighted with her daughtersinlaw and praised her son for his right action.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डेण्डे त्रयस्त्रिंशस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the thirtythird sarga of Balakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.