Having heard the devatas, extremely frightened, and deprived of their sensual perception by the prowess of fate. The adorable grandsire (Brahma) repliedः

'This whole earth belongs to sagacious Vasudeva. He always supports the earth assuming the form of Kapila. The princes will be burnt by the fire of his wrath.

The excavation of this earth and the destruction of the short lived sons of Sagara is predestined since eternity'.

"O Destroyer of enemies (Rama) On hearing the words of the grandsire (Brahma), the thirtythree gods, exceedingly delighted returned the way they had come.

A sound like the resembling of thunder emanated while the earth was being riven by the noble sons of Sagara.

Afterwards, all the sons of Sagara, having riven the earth approached their father and circumamulating him saidः

'The entire earth was ransacked. Mighty devatas, demons, rakshasas, pisachas, uragas and kinnaras were killed. (Yet) we could neither see the horse nor the thief of the horse. Reflect over this matter and direct us. Prosperity to you'

"O Rama incensed to fury at the words of his sons, magnanimous king Sagara replied"ः

Rive the earth again and excavate, capture the one who has stolen the horse and return after having accomplished the purpose. Safety to you

Receiving the command of their father, the magnanimous Sagara, his sixty thousand sons ran towards Rasatala (nether world).

Then while they were excavating the region they beheld the elephant of the quarter named Virupaksha equal in size to a mountain, supporting the earth.

O descendant of Raghu the mighty elephant Virupaksha was holding on its head the entire earth with its mountains and forests.

O descendant of Kakustha when that mighty elephant shakes its head for rest from weariness on certain sacred days earthquake occurs.

O Rama having circumabulated and honoured that mighty elephant, the protector of the quarter they reached the Rasatala by riving the earth.

Subsequently, having dug the eastern region, they went on to southern and dug it too. In the southern region, they beheld a mighty elephant, magnanimous Mahapadma, resembling a great mountain. To their astonishment, they saw that elephant holding  the earth on its head.

Thereafter, illustrious Sagara's sixty thousand sons, having circumabulated the elephant of the western region dug up that region.

Possessed of great strength, they beheld also in the western quarter a great elephant of the quarter named Saumanasa resembling a mountain.

Having paid homage and enquiring as to his wellbeing, they arrived at the northern region by digging the earth.

O Rama in the northern region, they beheld an auspicious elephant named Bhadra, who was white like snow, was holding that quater.

Then all sixty thousand sons having touched the elephant and circumambulated it, penetrated the earth.

Subsequently, the sons of Sagara, having gone towards the celebrated northeastern region began to dig with wrath.

Great sons of Sagara terribly swiftfooted and exceedingly powerful beheld the eternal Visnu in (sage) Kapila and not far away from him the horse grazing. O descendant of Raghu they all experienced unparalleled joy.

They recognised that best of horses. Their eyes were red with anger. Armed with spades, ploughshares and every kind of tree and stone and furious with wrath, they rushed towards Kapila shouting, wait, wait

'O Wickedminded one you have stolen our sacrificial horse. Know that those of us who have come here are the sons of Sagara'.

"O descendant of Raghu Kapila, having heard their words, overwhelmed with great wrath, uttered the sound "H'm".

O son of Kakusthas all the sons of Sagara were reduced to a heap of ashes, by that magnanimous Kapila, whose power was beyond imagination".  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे चत्वारिंशस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the fortieth sarga of Balakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.