"O Rama! afflicted with great grief when her sons were killed, Diti said to her husband Kasyapa, son of Marichaः

"O adorable one, your highly powerful sons, (devatas) have killed mine through extensive austerities. I am desirous of obtaining a (mighty) son capable of killing Indra.

I shall practise austerities. You ought to grant me a son who would be the supreme ruler of the world and capable of killing Indra. You can say yes (if you will)".

Then, Maricha's son, exceedingly bright Kasyapa on hearing the words of Diti who was deeply grieved repliedः

"O one vested with the wealth of austerities be it so. Prosperity to you Remain chaste, you will deliver a son who will kill Indra in the battle.

"If you remain pure and clean, on completion of a thousand years you will give birth to a son through me who will be the lord of the three worlds".

Highly brilliant Kasyapa, having thus spoken, touched her gently with his palm, stroked her body and said, "May good betide thee". Having said this, Kasyapa went away to perform austerities.

"O foremost among men after Kasyapa had left, Diti exceedingly delighted (at the prospect of having sons) reached Kushaplavana, and practised intense mortifications.

O foremost of men great treasure of virtues while she was practising austerities, the thousandeyed Indra began to serve her.

The thousandeyed Indra served her by providing fire, Kusha grass, sticks for burning,  water, fruits, roots and all other things desired by her.

Indra attended on Diti, stroking her limbs gently from time to time to help her regain their suppleness and alleviate her fatigue.

O son of the Raghus ten years before completion of a thousand years. Diti, highly pleased with the services rendered by Indra, addressed him", sayingः

"O best of the gods your illustrious father granted me a boon for a son I sought on completion of a thousand years (of penance).

O the best of the brave ten years is yet to go (for completion of austerities). You will have a brother. May you prosper

O Child I'll create in him eagerness victory. Together with him you will gain victory over the three worlds. Relieved of sorrows, enjoy you'll with him".

After speaking thus to Indra, goddess Diti overpowered with sleep around midsday dropped off, her feet towards her head.

Indra laughed. He rejoiced at the sight of her ominous posture of sleeping with her feet towards her head and her hair falling on her feet.

O Rama with great courage Indra entered her womb and severed her embryo into seven pieces.

O Rama that embryo, being severed by Vajra having a hundred edges, cried at high pitch which awakened Diti".

Highly powerful Indra, even while saying to the crying embryo "Do not weep, Do not weep" severed it.

"Do not kill", "Do not kill", said Diti. Subsequently Indra, in deference to the words of his mother, emerged out of the womb.

Armed with Vajra, Indra addressed Diti with folded palms, saying, "O Devi you have slept, with your head towards your feet and your hair falling on your feet".

"I have seized the opportunity and severed into seven pieces the foetus who would have been a slayer of Indra. O Devi shoudn't you forgive me"?  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे षट्चत्वारिंशस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the fortysixth sarga of Balakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.