Rama accompanied by Lakshmana with Viswamitra ahead proceeded in northeasterly direction and reached the sacrificial ground.

Rama with Lakshmana told the tiger among ascetics Viswamitra that the preparations or the sacrifice by the illustrious king Janaka were excellent.

O Illustrious sage thousands of brahmins living in different countries and versed in the study of the vedas have assembled here. The shelters for ascetics are thronged with hundreds of carts. O Great ascetic let us choose a place where we can stay.

Great ascetic Viswamitra, hearing Rama's words, chose a nottoocrowded place near a watersource for encampment.

When the king heard of the arrival of Viswamitra he went forward with Satananda, the blemishless family priest walking ahead in order to welcome him with humility.

Eminent officiating priests speedily brought the offerings of worship and paid obeisance to Viswamitra with prayers.

Viswamitra received illustrious king Janaka's worship and enquired about the welfare of the king and the conduct of the sacrifice.

Viswamitra duly enquired the wellbeing of the sages and the spiritual teachers, priests in right order. And thereafter the rest joined them in great delight.

The king then folded his hands in supplication to the foremost of ascetics, Viswamitra, saying "O Venerable one please be seated along with the eminent ascetics."

In response to Janaka's words, great sage Viswamitra occupied his seat. Thereafter the family priests, officiationg priests of the sacrifice, counsellors and also the king occupied their seats according to their rank.

Thereafter the king looked on all sides and saw all of them seated according to their rank and addressed Viswamitra sayingः

"Today my sacrifice has been rendered fruitful by the devatas. I have reaped the fruit of my sacrifice today by your venerable presence.

O Preeminent among ascetics O brahmana you have come to my sacrificial mandap along with these ascetics Blessed am I Obliged am I.

O Brahmarshi learned men say, only twelve days remain for completion of this acrifice. Thereafter O Viswamitra you should see devatas claiming their shares".

Having said this, the king (Janaka) with a cheerful countenance and saluting with folded palms again asked that tiger among ascetics (Viswamitra)ः

"O Sage (Viswamitra), be blessed. Who are these two young men with the prowess of the celestials the gait of an elephant or a lion? They resemble a tiger or a bull in courage. They have large eyes like lotuspetals. They are armed with scimitars bows and quivers. With their approaching youth, they resemble the Aswinikumaras in beauty. They look like gods who have descended on earth from heaven out of their free will. Whose sons are they? How did they come here on foot? And for what purpose?

Great ascetic, these two young men with hair falling on their temples like the wings of a crow, each of them resemble the other in personality, expressions and gestures. Wielding excellent weapons they adorn this land like the Moon and the Sun deck the sky. Whose sons are they? I wish truly to hear about these heroes".

Hearing the words of the magnanimous Janaka, Viswamitra presented them to him saying that they were the illustrious sons of Dasaratha.

The great ascetic Viswamitra, who was highly powerful related to the distinguished Janaka in full their undaunted journey to Siddhashrama and the slaughter of rakshasas there, the view of the city of Vishala, meeting with Ahalya and Gautama and the inquisitiveness about the great bow which brought them to Mithila and then kept quiet.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये बालकाणडे पञ्चाशस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the fiftieth sarga of Balakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.