"O Descendant of Raghu (Rama) having created enmity between himself and the magnanimous Vasishta, Viswamitra recollecting the disgrace and repeatedly sighing with a distressed heart went with his eldest wife towards southern quarter to perform rigorous penance. Subsisting on fruits and roots and his senses underfull control he performed the most rigid austerities.

After some time, four sons, Havishyanda, Madhushyanda, Drudhanetra and Maharatha, who (later) wer wedded to truth and duty, were born."

A thousand years passed. The Grandsire of the worlds, Brahma, appeared. He spoke to Viswamitra, the great ascetic, these pleasant wordsः

"O Son of Kushika with your austerities you have won the worlds of the rajarshis. On account of your austerities, you are acknowledged a rajarshi".

Having said this the glorious (Brahma), supreme lord of the worlds, left for his abode  in Brahmaloka, in heaven accompanied by the gods.

On hearing this Viswamitra hanging down his face a little with shame and anger and grief saidः

"I have performed intense austerities. Yet rishis and devatas have recognised me only as a rajarshi. I think my penance has yielded fruit.

"O Descendant of Kakustha (Rama) this celebrated intellectual having decided in his mind once again performed greater austerities.

At this time there lived a celebrated king, renowned in the Ikshvakus race, named Trisanku, who was truthful and self restrained.

"O Son of the Raghus (Rama) a thought arose in his mind to enter heaven with his physical body by performing a sacrifice.

Summoning Vasishta he (Trisahnku) communicated his intention, but the great Vasishta said it was not possible.

Refused by Vasishta, the king went south in order to fulfil his purpose and approached Vasishta's sons.

Most brilliant Trisanku approached the sons of Vasishta in the place where they had been performing austerities for a long time. There he saw the famous, exceedingly effulgent sons of Vasishta one hundred in number practising penance.

The king, having approached all the illustrious sons of his spiritual guide, paid obeisance to them in order of seniority. Bowing down his face in humility and with folded palms, he addressed all those distinguished sons of Vasishta sayingः

O protectors of those who seek refuge in you, protect me. Wish you well. I have been refused by the great Vasishta.

'I wish to perform a great sacrifice. You are worthy enough to tender your consent. I pay homage to all the sons of my spiritual guide oblige.

You, brahmins are established in austerity. I bow to you. I beg all of you to direct me with composed minds to direct me in order to attain heaven in physical form'.

O Ascetocs after having been rejected by Vasishta. I do not see any way other than the sons of my spiritual guide to help me achieve my purpose.

For all the descendants of Ikshvakus the spiritual preceptor is the supreme resort for salvation. Learned spiritual preceptors have always liberated kings. Hence you are all gods to me only next to Vasishta".  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे सप्तपञ्चाशस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the fiftyseventh sarga of Balakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic  composed by sage Valmiki.