What the king said was proved by his chandala form which the son of Kushika (Viswamitra) heard and out of compassion spoke these sweet wordsः

"O Descendant of Ikshvakus, O child, welcome. I know you as highly righteous. O eminent among kings fear not. I offer you refuge.

O king I shall invite pious maharshis to assist you in the sacrifice which you will be able to perform with great relief.

With the present physical body disfigured by the curse of your spiritual preceptor, you shall go to heaven.

O King since you have taken refuge in Viswamitra who is the protector of those who resort to him, I think heaven is already within your reach".

Most brilliant Viswamitra having thus spoken, ordered his deeply religious and highly  learned sons to make preparations for the sacrifice.

He summoned all his disciples, and said, "Children bring here hosts of rishis along with their disciples and friends, officiating priests and persons wellversed in the Srutis. This is my order.

If any one should speak with disrespect in response to my order, you may report the matter to me in full".

At his command the disciples set out in different directions. And as a result, expounders of the vedas began arriving from various countries.

All the disciples on their return, communicated to the sage shining in splendour what the expounders of the vedas had said.

Having heard your words, all brahmins except Mahodaya have arrived from all countries.

O Preeminent among ascetics Here is what the hundred sons of Vasishta spoke in anger.

When a kshatriya acts as a priest for the sacrifice, particularly for a chandala, how can gods and sages partake the offerings?

Joining Viswamitra, (in chanting the mantras during the yaga) how will the great brahmins attain heaven after partaking the food offered by of Chandala?

O Best among ascetics all the sons of Vasishta along with Mahodaya with their eyes reddened in anger spoke these harsh words"ः

On hearing the words (of the hundred sons of Vasishta uttered in anger) Viswamitra, preeminent among ascetics, spoke furiously with eyes reddened in anger.

"I am blameless. I have practised rigorous penance. These wicked ones who have abused (a sage like me) will be reduced to ashes.

Caught by the noose of death this day, they shall be brought to the abode of Yama and for seven hundred births, feed on corpses.

Reborn as the merciless race of mushtikas, feeding on the flesh of dogs, hideous and deformed, they shall wander in these worlds.

The wicked Mahodaya, who blamed a sage like me so faultless shall be reborn in the race of the nishadas vulnerable to abuse by all.

As a consequence of my anger that Mahodaya, devoid of mercy and taking pleasure in depriving others of their life, will pursue a wretched life for a long time".

The most powerful sage Viswamitra of fierce asceticism fell silent after after uttering  this curse in the assembly of rishis.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे एकोनषष्टितमस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the fiftyninth sarga of Balakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.