All the gods wanted to bestow the fruits of austerties on the mighty ascetic (Viswamitra). They approached him after a thousand years of penace and his final ritual bath.

Exceedingly effulgent Brahma spoke to him, "You have become a rishi through the selfearned sacred deeds. Fare you well".

Brahma, the lord of the gods, having said this returned to heaven. The brilliant Viswamitra continues his austerities.

"O Foremost of men after a long lapse of time a chief nymph called Menaka came to bathe at Pushkara.

There the most brilliant son of Kusika Viswamitra saw Menaka whose beauty was incomparable. She looked like lightning in the clouds.

On seeing her (Menaka) Viswamitra came under the influence of the god of love (fell in love with her). He said, O Apsara welcome to my hermitage stay here. I am infatuated with youः Oblige me. Wish you well.

"O Descendant of Raghu while that woman of an exalted race lived in the hermitage of Viswamitra, ten years rolled by happily".

As the period passed, Viswamitra the mighty ascetic was filled with grief, anxiety and  remorse.

O Delight of the Raghus (Rama) a sense of indignation filled the mind of the ascetic. 'All this is the conspiracy of the gods to deprive me of my great austerities', he thought.

Night and day deluded by lust I have wasted ten years. A hindrance has been posed (to my tapas).

"O Rama Viswamitra, the best of ascetics sighed with repentance, distressed with grief. On seeing him, the apsara started trembling in fear. She stood before him with folded palms. (But) with sweet words the son of Kushika left her and proceeded  towards the northern mountains.

Illustrious Viswamitra took a vow of celibacy in order to control his senses. And performed rigid austerities on reaching the bank of river Kausiki.

O Rama while he was performing rigorous penance for a thousand years on the northern mountains, the gods were gripped with fear. (lest he should exceed them).

After consultations the gods and sages decided that this son of Kushika (Viswamitra) deserved the status of a Maharshi".

Having heard the gods, the Grandsire of the worlds (Brahma) addressed Viswamitra whose wealth was his ascetism in these sweet words.

"O Maharshi O Child welcome Pleased with your intense austerities, O Son of Kushika I confer upon you the eminent rank of a great rishi (maharshi)".

Having heard the words Brahman, the lord of all the worlds, Viswamitra whose wealth was his asceticism was neither dejected nor delighted.

Then the mighty ascetic Viswamitra bowed to Brahma, the Grandsire of all the worlds with folded hands and repliedः

"O Adorable one, if you have conferred the incomparable title of 'Maharshi' earned by my auspicious deeds, I feel I have conquered the senses."

Then Brahma said to him, 'You have not conquered the senses yet. O Tiger among  ascetics, strive still.' Having said this he went toward heaven.

After the departure of the gods, mighty ascetic Viswamitra raised his arms up, stood without support, subsisting on air, continuing with his austerities.

Viswamitra whose wealth was his penance carried on his rigid austerities for a thousand years amidst five fires, in summer, under the open sky in monsoon, and immersed in ater night and day in winter.

When the mighty asetic Viswamitra was peforming penance, the gods as well as Indra got deeply perturbed.

Indra along with all the maruts spoke to the celestial nymph Rambha, words that augured well for them and not for kaushika (Viswamitra).  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे त्रिषष्टितमस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the sixtythird sarga of Balakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.