"O Rama thereafter the great ascetic (Viswamitra), abandoning the north of the Himavat mountain reached the eastern quarter and performed rigorous austerities.

Having observed a unique vow of silence for a thousand years, O Rama he practised unprecedented and extremely difficult austerities.

After completion of a thousand years the great ascetic became a piece of wood. In spite of many impediments, he was unshaken, anger did not enter into his mind. O Rama with firm determination he practised austerities.

O Best of Raghus dynasty (Rama) when the thousandyearold vow was over (Viswamitra) the great practitioner of vows began to partake cooked rice. At this moment Indra assumed the guise of a brahmin and asked him for the rice (he was going to eat).

This mighty, adorable ascetic having adopted a vow of silence decided to give all the cooked rice to the Brahmin. The brahmin finished all the rice. Viswamitra went without food but did not utter a single word to the brahmin. Thereafter the distinguished ascetic practised austerities for another period of thousand years, his breath suspended.

While his breath, was suspended, smoke emanated from his head which frightened the three worlds. It appeared as though they were on fire.

Thereupon devatas along with gandharvas, pannagas, uragas, and rakshasas, stood bewildered by his ascetic energy. Their own glory was dimmed in his lustre". Afflicted with anguish, they spoke to the Grandsire (Brahma)ः

"O Lord the great sage Viswamitra was lured and angered in various ways. But his austerities continued to growः

His penance was flawless. If his wishes were not granted, he will surely destroy by his austerities the three worlds with all movables and immovables.

There is bewilderment everywhere. It is dark all over. The oceans are disturbed. The mountains have cracked.

O Brahma the earth trembles. The wind blows fiercely. The people have ceased to believe in God. We do not know the way out.

The people of all the three worlds are agitated and confused in mind. The Sun, too, looks pale before the brilliance of the Maharshi.

O Lord before this mighty, venerable ascetic, effulgent like fire decides to destroy the three worlds, he should be appeased.

All the three worlds are burning as though with the fire Pralaya (dissolution). His desire may be granted even if he wants to rule the kingdom of the gods.

Thereafter, with Brahma in the forefront, the gods spoke to Viswamitra in pleasing wordsः

"Welcome, O Brahmarshi. We are immensely pleased with your austerities. O Kausika you have attained brahminhood by means of your intense penance.

O Brahmana I along with the maruts grant you long life. May you prosper O Gentle one now you may go happily".

Mighty ascetic Viswamitra was delighted to hear the words of the Grandsire and the gods. Bowing to all of them he thus spokeः

"If brahminhood and long life have been acquired by me by your grace, Omkara, Vashatkara and the Vedas shall accept me as Brahmarshi. (I shall acquire the right to interpret the Vedas and to perform sacrifices.)

"O gods let the son of Brahma and eminent Vasishta who is knowledgeable in the vedas worthy of brahmins and archery worthy of kshatriyas address me as 'Brahmarshi'. If this supreme desire is granted, O Best of devatas all of you can go".

Thereupon, pleased by the gods, Vasishta, the best among ascetics, lovingly said to Viswamitra "You are a Brahmarshi, let it be so".

"You are a Brahmarshi, no doubt. You will achieve ascetic perfection", said the gods  and returned to their respective places from where they had come.

Virtuous Viswamitra also, having attained excellent brahminhood, worshipped Brahmrshi Vasishta who was the best of those who recite hymns".

This illustrious sage having fulfilled his desire, wandered over the earth fixed in asceticism. O Rama thus he acquired brahminhood.

O Rama he is the foremost of ascetics, an embodiment of asceticism, always intent on virtue. He is the ultimate repository of ascetic energy".

Having thus spoken, the most brilliant and best among brahmins (Satananda) became silent. In the presence of Rama and Lakshmana, Janaka listened to the words of Satananda. And with folded palms said to the son of Kushika (Viswamitra)ः

"O Righteous one O Preeminent among ascetics you have come to my sacrifice accompanied by the descendants of Kakustha (Rama and Lakshmana). I am blessed by your presence and am highly favoured.

O Excellent ascetic O Brahmana I am sanctified with your presence. I have derived immense benefits from your visit.

O powerful Brahmarshi distinguished Rama and I have heard your great austerities which were related in detail (by Satananda).

Many of your virtues have been heard by the members of the assembly present at the sacrifice. Your austerities are immeasurable, your power is immense. O Son of Kushika (Viswamitra), your virtues cannot be measured.

O Lord I am never tired of listening to your marvellous deeds. O Excellent among ascetics the Sun has set and it is time for evening prayers.

O Sage of great austerities come to me tomorrow at dawn. O Excellent ascetic welcome And allow me to leave".

Thus addressed (by the king), the gratified ascetic extolled the best among men (Janaka) and permitted him to leave immediately.

Having thus addressed the greatest sage, king of Videha, Lord of the city of Mithila (Janaka) accompanied by his king and spiritual preceptors circumambulated Viswamitra without delay.

Virtuous Viswamitra, honoured by the maharshis, too, retired to his shelter along with Rama and Lakshmana.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे पञ्चषष्टितमस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the sixtyfifth sarga of Balakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.