The day dawned bright and clear when the king (Janaka) performed his daily routine rites and welcomed the great Viswamitra with the two Raghavas (Rama and Lakshmana).

The virtuous Janaka paid respects to Viswamitra and the highsouled Rama and Lakshmana in accordance with the sastras and spokeः

"Welcome, O Venerable one O Irreproachable one what can I do for you? Worthy of being commanded, I seek your orders.

At the words of the magnanimous Janaka, the virtuous sage wellversed in speech replied to the heroic kingः

Dasaratha's sons, (Rama and Lakshmana), kshatriyas renowned in the world are eager to see that great bow in your possession.

Be blessed. Show this great bow to the princes. This is their desire. Once it is fulfilled, they will go back.

Thus addressed by the mighty ascetic Janaka replied, "I shall tell you how this bow came to be deposited here".

"O Adorable one there was a famous king named Devarata, sixth in line from Nimi. This bow was kept with him in trust by the exalted lord (Shiva).

Earlier at the time of destruction of Daksha's sacrifice, Rudra endowed with great  prowess lifted this bow sportively and spoke to the gods.

'O gods in your anxiety to partake your share of the sacrifie, you have failed to provide mine in the sacrificial offerings. Therefore, I shall sever your jewelled heads and beautiful limbs with this bow'.

"O Eminent ascetic thereafter all the gods with agitated minds propitiated lord of the gods, Siva and he was pleased with them.

O Lord that gem of a bow belonging to Siva was given to the great gods who in turn got it deposited in trust with our ancestor.

Thereupon while I was ploughing and cleaing the (sacrificial) ground, Sita, a wellknown name, was lifted up by the blade of the plough. Thus she was obtained by  me.

Arisen from the earth and not from a mother's womb, she grew up as my daughter. I made a stipulation that (this shall be the means to win this maiden as a gift) this shall be given in marriage only to the prince whose prowess is fully tried.

O Eminent ascetic arisen from the earth and reared as my daughter, she has been sought after in marriage by many princes.

O Worshipful one all those monarchs sought this maiden but I did not offer my daughter saying that the 'marriage offer' could be made only through the tried and tested prowess of a suitor.

O Preeminent among ascetics thereafter many kings together came to Mithila to test their prowess.

The bow was brought and placed before those who were curious to test their strength  but none was able to grasp or lift the bow.

O great ascetic I knew those mighty kings had little strength, so rejected them.

O Mighty ascetic, thereafter all the kings doubting their own strength in stringing the bow were inflamed with anger and laid siege on Mithila.

Those eminent kings felt humiliated. Inflamed with anger, they tormented the city of Mithila.

O Best among ascetics thus one year passed. Everywhere in the city all the means of living were exhausted. I felt deeply sad over this situation.

Thereafter, I propitiated the gods by my austerities. Highly pleased, they gave me an army of four divisions (chariots, elephants, horses and infantry ).

Then those wicked kings who were exhausted were doubtful about their energy. They were beaten and defeated. They fled away along with their ministers in different directions.

O Sage you are a tiger among asceties, you are faithful to your vows, I shall show this effulgent bow to your Rama and Lakshmana .

O Sage if Rama could lift and string this bow I shall give my daughter Sita, not born from a woman, to him (son of Dasaratha)".  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे षट्षष्टितमस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the sixtysixth sarga of Balakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.