Hearing the words of the son of Jamadagni (Parasurama), Rama, the son of Dasaratha, avoiding further conversation out of respect for his father intercepted Parasurama sayingः

"O Descendant of Bhrigu I have listened to the (marvellous) acts you have performed. O Brahman I commend you for discharging your duty in repaying the debt to your father.

You underrate me O Bhargava as though I am devoid of valour and incompetent to perform the duties of a Kshatriya. Now witness my energy and valour.

Having spoken thus, the enraged Rama, gifted with quick vigour, seized the bow and arrow from Parasurama's hands.

Infuriated Rama bent the bow stretched it, fixed the arrow and addressed Parasurama, the son of Jamadagniः

"You are a brahmin, O Parasurama. You are also related to Viswamitra. Hence you are worthy of homage. I cannot, therefore, release this against you to take your life.

I shall destroy your mobility, O Parasurama or the higher worlds earned through your matchless asceteic energy. Tell me which one you choose.

On conquering the hostile cities and destroying the pride and strength of the enemy  by its prowess, this celestial arrow of Visnu shall not go in vain".

The gods with the Grandsire, Brahma in the forefront, accompanied by sages in groups assembled there to see Rama holding that mighty bow. Gandharvas, apsaras, siddhas, charanas, kinnaras, yakshas, rakshsas and nagas also came there to witness that great wonder.

Then when Rama stretched the great bow, the world became motionless. The son of Jamadagni, Parasurama, bereft of prowess gazed at him with astonishment.

His energy subdued by Rama's prowess, the paralysed, Parasurama, son of Jamadagni spoke in gentle words to him whose eyes resembled the lotus petalsः

"When I gave this entire earth to Kasyapa, he said to me, 'you shall not live in my country'.

O Descendant of Kakustha having gifted this earth to Kasyapa, I promised him that I would not live here, during night time. For the earth belongs to him.

For this, you should not destroy my mobility, O valiant son of the Raghus. I shall go to Mahendra, the best of mountains, with the speed of mind.

Strike with the, principal arrow the unrivalled worlds conquered by my asceticism. Do not delay, O Rama

By the fact that you have stretched this bow, I have come to know that you are Visnu, Lord of the gods, slayer of Madhu, O Imperishable one O Tormentor of enemies Fare well.

All your deeds are incomparable. You are unassailable in combat. All these hosts of gods have assembled here and are looking at you.

I have been defeated by you, O Descendant of Kakustha lord of the three worlds. Therefore, it is not right for me to feel ashamed.

You are faithful to vows O Rama This arrow has no equal in prowess. It behoves of you to release it against me. After its release I shall go to the excellent Mahendra mountain".

Thus spoke Parasurama, son of Jamadagni to Rama, the valiant son of Dasaratha who (then) discharged the principal arrow.

Having witnessed the destruction of those regions earned by him through asceticism, the son of Jamadagni left for the best of mountains Mahendra.

Thereafter all the quarters including the intermediaries were cleared of darkness. Hosts of sages and gods extolled Rama when he wielded the bow.

Parasurama, the competent son of Jamadagni, having praised Rama, the son of  Dasaratha circumbulated him and left for his abode.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे षट्सप्ततितमस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the seventysixth sarga of Balakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.