Such a majestic, righteous, and magnaninous king had no son to perpetuate the race even though he performed austerities for one.

While reflecting over the matter, a thought struck the magnanimous kingः 'Why not invoke gods by performing a horsesacrifice for a son'.

Having made up his mind to perform the sacrifice, that sagacious and pious king, in consultation with his wise ministers, issued the following command to Sumantra, the best of ministers "Bring all my spritual preceptors along with family priests."

Thereupon Sumantra of swift movement immediateiy brought together Suyajna, Vamadeva,Jabali, Kasyapa and priest Vasistha along with other brahmins who had mastery over the Vedas.

Virtuous king Dasaratha paid homage to them (the ministers) and uttered these gracious, righteous and meaningful words.

There is no happiness for one who has no son. This is the cause of my intense suffering. Therefore, I have made up my mind to perform a horsesacrifice.

Therefore, I intend to perform a horsesacrifice in accordance with the scriptures. How can I fulfil my desire in this regard? You may deliberate and find a solution".

The brahmins along with Vasishta in the forefront extolled the king's decision,  exclaiming, 'Well, Well'.

Highly pleased, they all said to king Dasaratha, "Requisite articles be collected for the sacrifice and the horse be released."

'O king, the wish that arose in your mind is just and right. You will definitely obtain sons as desired by you.'

On hearing the words of the brahmins, the king was pleased and said to his ministers with eyes excited with delight.

"Let the articles required (for performing the sacrifice) be procured in accordance with the words of my spiritual preceptors and the horse be released under the protection of able men.

On the northern bank of Sarayu, a sacrificial pavillion be prepared according to the methods ordained in the 'Kalpa'. Auspicious rites be performed in accordance with the ordinance for its uninterrupted completion.

If obstructions and omissions do not occur in the conduct of this best of sacrifices, it will be possible for every king to get the results.

The learned brahmarakshasas always look out for flaws in the sacrifice so that they can spoil it. If a flaw finds place, the doer of the sacrifice is immediately destroyed.

Therefore let the arrangements be made in a manner this sacifice is completed in accordance with the scriptures. And in this, you are experts".

Having heard these words of this Indra on earth (king Dasaratha) all the ministers with due respect repliedः "May it be as ordered".

Bowing to this best of kings (Dasaratha), all the brahmins who were experts in austerities left all the knowledgeable brahmins as they camewith his permission.

After sending away the brahmins, the king said to his ministersः "Let this sacrifice be performed as enjoined by scriptures and as directed by the officiating priests".

Having thus ordered his ministers sitting nearby, sent this highly brilliant, this  preeminent among kings them away and entered the inner apartment.

Thereafter the king said to his dearest wivesः "I intend to perform a sacrifice in order to obtain sons. Therefore, you, too, commence religious discipline."

On listening to these exceedingly charming words, their bright countenances shone resplendent like lotuses after the departure of winter.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे अष्टमस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the eighth sarga of Balakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.

