The charioteer tells the king in privacy that he has heard the advice given by the offciating priests.

"O king, the divine Sanatkumara had narrated a story about your posterity in the presence of sages.

Kasyapa has a famous son named Vibhandaka. It was prophesied that he would have a son named Rsyasringa.

Grown up in the forest and always moving with his father, that sage knows none other than his father.

O eminent king, sage Rsyasringa celebrated in the three worlds who practises a twofold brahmacharya life (life of celebacy) described by brahmins (as vratitva and prajapatya).

Worshipping the firegod and attending on his renowned father, he will spend a long time living in this manner (practising vratitva mode of brahmacharya).

At this time a powerful king Romapada, mighty and celebrated would be living in the country of Anga.

Because of violation of code of conduct by the king, a terrible, dreadful drought frightening all living beings will set in the kingdom.

With drought prevailing, the griefstricken king, would summon all those grown old with learning and tell them.



Those brahmins versed in the Vedas, said, to 'O king bring here Rsyasringa, son of the sage Vibhandaka by all means'.

"O monarch, on having brought Rsyasringa here, honour him, and offer him your daughter Santa with due reverence.

On hearing their words, the king in a thoughtful mood said, 'How can the mighty sage be brought here'?

Thereafter the confident king, having decided, in consultation with his ministers to bring him (Rsyasringa), sent the priest with the counsellors on this mission.

On hearing the king's words, distressed and frightened by rishi's power, they appealed to the king, faces bent down, 'We will not go'.

After thinking about the means to be employed to bring the rishi to the court, they told him they would bring the sage if they are not to blame (in case anything untoward  happens).

Thus with the help of courtesans of the king of Anga, when the son of the sage (Rsyasringa) was brought rains followed. The king offered his daughter Santa (in marriage to the sage).

'Risyasringa, your soninlaw, would help you to obtain sons'. Thus said Sanathkumara which I have related to you.

Thereupon Dasaratha, pleased, (with him), said to Sumantra, "Describe in detail the means by which Rsyasringa was brought (to the court of Romapada)".  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे नवमस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the ninth sarga of Balakanda of the holy Ramayana of the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.