Rama remained silent after saying these meaningful words on the bank of river Mandakini. Then the Bharata, conforming to righteousness, replied in clear words to the virtuous Rama who was affectionate by nature.

O subduer of enemies, you are of such nature that neither sorrow pains you nor pleasure delights you. There are none in this world like you. You are loved by the elders, for you seek their counsel whenever you have doubts.

O subduer of enemies, you are of such nature that neither sorrow pains you nor pleasure delights you. There are none in this world like you. You are loved by the elders, for you seek their counsel whenever you have doubts.

One should accept life and death, vice and virtue equally. How can one be afflicted when he has gained such an intellect?

O lord of men, it is not proper for a person like you who knows the past and the future of human beings to feel distressed and lament over it.

O magnanimous Rama, your nature is divine and you are true to your promises. You are omniscient, allseeing and wise.

It is not proper for a virtuous man like you, who is cognizant in matters of life and death, to be overwhelmed by such insufferable grief.

When I was away from home, my meanminded mother committed a sin for my sake which I never wished. You may pardon me graciously.

I am bound by a bond of righteousness for which I am unble to slay my mother who deserves severe punishment for her sinful acts.

How shall I, born to Dasaratha of noble race and righteous deeds, with the knowledge of dharma, do such a reprehensible and unrighteous deed?

King Dasaratha, my father and preceptor, is godlike to me. Devoted to meritorious acts, he departed from this world in his old age. For this reason, I cannot reproach him (publicly) in this assembly (of men).

O Rama, conversant with righteousness, will any one who knows the meaning of righteousness, do such a sinful act contrary to dharma and artha to please a woman?

There is an ancient saying that at the time of death, the intellect of people is deluded. By conducting himself in this way, king Dasaratha has proved it.

Our father has trangressed righteousness due to anger or delusion or recklessness. Therefore, you may think over the matter prudently and set it right.

One who sets right the wrongs done by his father is a true son. Otherwise the son becomes just the opposite. (He is not a son to the father).

So be a worthy son and let not the sinful act committed by our father and condemned by men of wisdom be approved by you.

Protect this entire kingdom, Kaikeyi, me and father, our friends and relations, citizens  of the city and inhabitants of the countryside.

Where is the forest and where is kshatriya's duty? Where are matted locks and where is governance of the kingdom? It does not behave you to do such acts antithetical to each other.

O sagacious one, the primary duty of a kshatriya is to be crowned. This enables him to rule his subjects.

Will any kshatriya, setting aside his first duty, follow an uncertain course of piety which is contrary to his dharma and whose impact may be felt in a remote future.

If you so desire to follow the path of dharma acquired out of physical exertion, then bear the trouble of governing the four castes of the social order righteously.

O Rama, you are the one who knows his duty. The knowers of dharma maintain that  the life of a householder is the foremost among the four modes of life. How can you renounce it?

Being younger to you in knowledge, position and birth, how can I rule the earth when you are present?

I am a child, deficient in intelligence and virtue and even inferior in position. Deserted by you, I do not wish to live.

O one, conversant with righteousness rule unhindered this entire kingdom along with our relations inherited from our father.

Let all ministers, subjects, and priests including Vasistha who are wellversed in Vedic hymns consecrate you here itself.

After consecration, you too return to rule Ayodhya along with all of us like Indra who went back (to heaven), accompanied by Maruts after conquering all the worlds with his prowess.

Discharging completely the three debts, to gods, to ancestors and to sages, subduing your enemies and gratifying your friends, you alone (have the right) to dictate me.

O my esteemed brother let all your friends be delighted today at your enthronement and your enemies flee in terror in ten different directions.

O best of men, wiping out all the censure on my mother, redeem our revered father from sin.

I beseech you with my head bowed low, show mercy on me and every one of our relations, like Maheswara showing compassion on all living beings.

If you turn your back on my solicitations and set out for the forest I shall also go along with you from here itself.

Thus besought and propitiated by Bharata with his head bowed low and distressed, the virtuous lord of the world, Rama, firmly established in the words of his father, resolved not to go back to Ayodhya.

Having seen the wonderful deternmination of Rama, people were, at once, anguished and delighted, anguished because he would not return to Ayodhya, and delighted because he was firm in his resolve.

All the priests, the chiefs of merchant organizations and mothers who had their senses switched off and theif tears drained dry extolled Bharata for his words. All of them, reverentially saluting Rama, implored him.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे षडुत्तरशततमस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the one hundredsixth sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.