Then Bharata accompanied by Satrughna, placing the sandals on his head in delight, boarded the chariot.

Vasishta, Vamadeva, Jabali of rigorous penance and all the ministers honoured for their counsel proceeded ahead.

All of them circumambulated the mighty mountain Chitrakuta and proceeded east  towards the charming river Mandakini.

Beholding a thousand varieties of beautiful minerals, Bharata with his army proceeded alongside the mountain.

Not far from Chitrakuta mountain, Bharata beheld a hermitage where sage Bharadwaja resided.

On approaching the hermitage of sage Bharadwaja, Bharata alighted from the chariot,  and prostrated at his feet.

Then Bhardwaja asked Bharata in delight, My son, have you accomplished your task? Did you meet Rama?

Having been thus addressed by wise Bharadwaja, Bharata, devoted to righteousness, repliedः

Entreated by me and by preceptor (Vasistha), the highly pleased Rama with his firmness of mind replied to Vasisthaः

In sooth, I shall honour the words of promise given by my father and live in the forest for fourteen years, as promised.

On hearing him, Vasistha a great intellectual and highly eloquent one replied to Rama, skilled in words of deep significance.

O extremely sagacious one, bestow with pleasure your sandals decked with gold for security and safety of Ayodhya.

Thus addressed by Vasistha, Rama stood facing eastward wearing these sandals. and bestowed them on me for the sake of ruling the kingdom.

I am now returning to Ayodhya with these auspicious sandals permitted by the magnanimous Rama.

Hearing the auspicious words of the magnanimous Bharata, sage Bharadwaja said to him in words still more auspicious.

O best of men, foremost among men of excellent character and dispositon, it is not surprising that all noble qualities come to reside in you naturally like water poured flowing downward.

With you as his son, endowed with qualities of righteousness and devotion to duty, your mightyarmed father Dasaratha is not dead. (He lives through you).

Hearing the words of the magnanimous Bharadwaja, Bharata paid his respect, folding his palms, and clasping the feet of the sage and sought his permission to leave.

Then illustrious Bharata circumambulated the sage several times in homage before he  set out for Ayodhya with his counsellors.

The vast army of Bharata with all its carriages, carts, horses and elephants following him again turned back towards Ayodhya.

Thereafter, all of them crossed the divine river Yamuna wreathed in waves and, beheld the Ganga of sacred waters once again.

Bharata along with his kins and his army crossed the Ganga with its overflowing, wonderful waters and entered the beautiful city of Sringiberapura and from there he proceeded until he beheld the city of Ayodhya.

On seeing the city of Ayodhya bereft of his father and brothers, Bharata, consumed with grief, said to the charioteerः

O charioteer, look, Ayodhya is in shapeless shambles. It is silent and cheerless. It is dull and desolate. It shines no more.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे त्रयोदशोरशततमस्सर्गः।  Thus ends the hundredthirteenth sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.