After Bharta, had departed, Rama who was living in the penancegrove of ascetics observed that the ascetics were filled with apprehensions, and were eager (to leave that forest).

Rama observed that the sages who earlier sought to stay with him near his hermitage  under his protection on chitrakuta were filled with anxiety (now).

Those sages, glancing at Rama with suspicious eyes, knitting their eyebrows and murmering among themselves, conversed secretly.

Having observed their anxiety, Rama apprehending somethig in his mind approached the chief of the hermitage with folded palms and saidः

O revered sire, have you seen any change in my conduct? For what reason are the sages looking perturbed?

Have the sages found my younger brother Lakshmana doing something unbecoming of him through inadvertence?

Has Sita devoted in her service to me and engaged in serving you failed to follow the conduct befitting a woman?

Hearing those words, an ascetic old in age and austerities, as though trembling said to Rama who is compassionate to all beingsः

O dear child, how can goodnatured Sita who is always engaged in performing auspicious deeds, especially towards ascetics be associated with violation of duty?

There is apprehension for ascetics from the demons on acount of your presence here. That is why they are conversing with one another about the likely fallout.

O dear child, Khara, one of the brothers of Ravana is dwelling in nearby 'Janasthana'. He is impudent, reportedly winner of battles, cruel, sinful, a maneater and haughty.  He has uprooted all the ascetics from Janasthana. He will not tolerate even you.

O dear child, ever since you started residing in this hermitage rakshasas have been tormenting the ascetics.

They appear in various distorted forms now rapacious, now fearful, now deformed.

Those wicked rakshasas employ forbidden and dirty means against ascetics and kill them by suddenly appearing in front of them.

These debased rakshasas, concealing themselves in various ashram sites take  delight in harassing and killing the ascetics.

When sacrifices are about to start, they throw away the sacrificial ladels and vessels containing sacrificial materials and sprinkle water on sacrificial fire. They also break down the earthen vessels used in the sacrifice.

Now all these sages are urging me to abandon this hermitage infested by these wicked rakshasas and move to another region.

O Rama, those vile creatures resort to physical violence against ascetics, we have therefore, resolved to quit this ashram.

Not very far from here stands an ancient ashram in a lovely forest abounding in roots and fruits and I with my companions will seek shelter there.

Dear child, Khara will also misbehave with you as usual. (Therefore), if you so decide you may come along with us.

O Rama, even though you are always vigilant and capable in all possible ways to defend youself, a doubt arises in our mind. It is perilous for you to live here with your wife.

It was not possible for prince Rama to hold back by mere words that ascetic who was saying like this and was anxious to quit the hermitage.

The leader of the group quit the hermitage along with his companions after paying respect to Rama, convincing him and taking leave of him.

Rama, followed the sages for some distance to bid them farewell. He paid obeisance to the chief of the group and having grasped the instruction of the highly pleased sages, he with their consent returned to his holy hermitage.

Lord Rama, did not leave that hermitage deserted by the sages even for a moment. Those who had adopted the traditions of the sages and had acquired many virtues followed Rama.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे षोडशोत्तरशततमस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the hundredsixteenth sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.