The great sages assembled there were amazed at witnessing the meeting of the two brothers (Rama and Bharata) of umparalleled briliance.

The hosts of sages, siddhas and devarshis watching invisible the two Kakutstha brothers extoled them.

On hearing their dialogue we are deeply drawn towards them, these two sons of king Dasaratha who was fortunate to have these practioners of righteousness and whose strength is dharma.

Thereafter hosts of rishis desiring the speedy destruction of tenheaded Ravana said these words to Bharata, the best of kings.

O Bharata, born in an illustrious race, highly sagacious and a man of virtuous conduct and great renown, accept Rama's proposal if you have any regard for your father.

We always desire that Rama should discharge his debt to his father. Dasaratha, who by redeeming himself of his obligation to Kaikeyi, had ascended heaven.

Then the great rishis, gandharvas and royal sages having said this, returned to their respective abodes.

Of pleasing appearance, Rama, gladdened by the auspicious statements (of the sages), paid them homage with a cheerful countenance.

Before Bharata, with his limbs trembling and with palms folded (in reverence) was ready to depart, he said to Ramaः

O Rama, keeping in view the code of kings and tradition of our family, it behoves you to consider my supplication and that of my mother.

I do not venture to protect this kingdom all by myself and keep the inhabitants of the towns and villages who are loyal to you pleased.

All our relatives, warriors, friends and wellwishers long to see you like farmers yearn for the raincloud.

O sagacious Rama, accept this kingdom and ensure its stability. You are powerful enough to govern this world. So accept this kingdom and restore its stability.

Having said this, Bharata, fell at the feet of his brother, and speaking sweetly, he profusely entreated Rama.

Rama took his in his arms Bharata who had a darkblue complexion, whose eyes were like petals of lotus and whose voice was the voice of an amorous swan.

O child, this wisdom of yours is both inborn and imbibed through training. With this,  you are perfectly capable of protecting the earth.

After due consultation with ministers, friends, counsellors and prudent persons, accomplish all tasks, however formidable they may appear.

The Moon might lose its splendour, snow might abandon the Himavat mountain, the ocean might overstep its shores, but I shall not forsake the promise made to my father.

Dear brother, whether out of affection or greed, your mother has done this for your  sake. It should not agitate your mind. You should conduct yourself as one should towards one's mother.

On hearing this, Bharata replied to the son of Kausalya who looked like the Sun or the new Moon in brillianceः

O noble one, place your feet on these sandals decorated with gold. They will secure the prosperity and safety of the entire world.

Rama, the best of men, one with great brilliance, put on and then put off the sandals and presented them to the magnanimous Bharata.

Bharata bowed before the sandals and said to Rama, 'O tormentorr of enemies, O hero, wearing matted locks and bark garments, living on fruits and roots, placing the responsibility of ruling the kingdom on your sandals and looking forward to your arrival, I shall reside outside the city for fourteen years.'

O best of the Raghus, if I do not behold you on the day after completion of fourteen years I shall enter the blazing fire.

'Be it so', assured Rama and then affectionately embracing both Bharata and Satrughna, said to Bharataः

Look after your mother, O chief of the Raghus Do not be angry with her. Swear in my name and in the name of Sita. So saying, eyes filled with tears, Rama took leave of his brother.

The valiant and righteous Bharata, worshipped the welldecorated sandals and after circumambulating Rama reverentially placed them atop the best of elephants.

Inflexibly fixed in his own code of righteouness, like the Himavat mountain, Rama, the enhancer of the progeny of the Raghu dynasty, paid respect due to the preceptors, ministers and subjects in accordance with their rank, blessed his younger brothers, Bharata and Satrughna and sent them forth.

His mothers were unable to bid him farewell their throats were choked with tears of sorrow but Rama himself paid obeisance to them and entered his hut in tears.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे द्वादशोत्तरशततमस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the hundredtwelfth sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.