Bharata, the renowned lord (of Ayodhya) travelled on the chariot that produced a deep, soothing, sound. And entered Ayodhya soon.



(The city looked) like Rohini, the beloved consort of the Moon, the star which was  majesticlly radiating flaming brilliance and now, tormented by the exalted Rahu which has eclipsed the Moon, shines alone.

(It appeared) like a lean mountainstream with scant, hot and turbid waters, with scorched aquatic birds and with small and large fishes and crocodiles dead due to the heat of the Sun.



warriors slain in the great battle (the city appeared desolate).





the midst of the herd despairs and no longer grazes the new grass.





with the melodious humming of intoxicated bees and suddenly shrivelling, ravaged by the fastspreading forest fire.

Ayodhya with its markets and shops closed, and its merchants in a daze looked like the sky covered with clouds obscuring the Moon and stars.

(Ayodhya looked) like an uncleansed drinking place with broken pitchers emptied of excellent wine scattered around and with drunkards lying dead in the open.

(Ayodhya appeared) like a ruined well, its foundations broken and sunken into the earth, its water used up, with broken pots scattered around, its riven surface forming a dale.











Illustrious Bharata, son of Dasaratha, seated in his chariot, addressed the charioteer as he drove the most excellent of chariots sayingः

How is it that in Ayodhya, the deep and allpervasive songs and sounds of musical instruments of the former days are not heard now?

The breeze no longer carries the intoxicating odour of spirituous liquor, the pervading fragrance of flower garlands and agaru (incense).

After Rama's the exile the clatter of excellent carriages, the pleasing neighing of horses and trumpeting of elephants in rut and the rattle of chariots are no longer heard now.

Since Rama has departed, the young men in distress do not enjoy expensive incense of agaru and sandalwood paste and garlands of fresh flowers.

This city is stricken with grief on account of Rama's departure. Men do not go out on pleasure jaunts wearing garlands of variegated flowers. Festivities are not celebrated.

Certainly splendour has left along with my brother. Like the night when the rain pours down during the waning of the Moon, Ayodhya shines not.

When will my brother return to Ayodhya like a carnival and cause delight to every one like summer clouds?

The highways of Ayodhya thronged with groups of elegantly attired young men or adults with their majestic gait, do not shine.

Thus mourning in several ways, Bharata entered his fathers' palace (now) bereft of the king like a cave without the lion.

Selfpossessed Bharata beholding the secluded inner apartment deserted by the gods shorn of splendour, like the day deprived of the Sun shed tears in distress.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे चतुर्दशोत्तरशततमस्सर्गः।  Thus ends the hundredfourteenth sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.