After the benedictory rites were performed by his mother Kausalya, Rama paid obeisance to her and staying on the righteous path decided to depart to the forest. He entered the highway thronged with people and illumining it with his lustre and stirred their hearts with (remembrances of) his excellent virtues.

After the benedictory rites were performed by his mother Kausalya, Rama paid obeisance to her and staying on the righteous path decided to depart to the forest. He entered the highway thronged with people and illumining it with his lustre and stirred their hearts with (remembrances of) his excellent virtues.

Sita, her mind preoccupied with thoughts about consecration, was engaged in religious austerities and hence could not hear of all this (development).

Experienced in palace rituals, Sita, grateful (to God) after performing worship of the deities was awaiting in a happy mood the arrival of the prince.

His head bent down in embarrassment, Rama entered his welldecorated residence thronged with excited people.

Sita got up suddenly, (her limbs) trembling to see her husband distressed with grief and agitated with anxiety.

On seeing her, virtuous Rama could not contain the sorrow in his mind which manifested (through his external appearance).

On seeing Rama with a pale face. indignant and heavily perspiring, Sita, consumed with grief said, My Lord, why are you now like this?

O scion of the Raghu race, today has been declared by learned brahmins a suitable and auspicious day for consecration under Pushya star with Brihaspati as presiding deity. Then why are you dejected?

How is it that your charming face shines not today under a hundredribbed umbrella (white) like foam in water?

(How is it that) your face, with its lotuslike eyes is not being fanned by excellent fans of the colour of the Moon or the swan.

(How is it that) O best among men eloquent panegyrists, charioteers, bards are not seen singing your praise with auspicious words?

How is it that brahmins versed in the Vedas have not duly sprinkled the mixture of honey and curd on your head (prior to your consecration)?

How is it that welladorned ministers, citizens from towns and villages, heads of guilds and others do not follow you?

How is it that the chief ceremonial chariot, decorated with gold and harnessed by four galloping horses is not preceding you?

How is it that the elephant, whose lustre resembles that of a mountain or a dark cloud and endowed with auspicious features is not seen leading your procession, O valiant one

O heroic one O handsome one how is it that I do not see your attendants proceeding in front with the throne carved in gold?

How is it that when arrangements are under way now for your consecration, the complexion of your countenance does not look like what it was before? There is no joy on your face.

O Sita my venerable father is banishing me to the forest, said Rama, the scion of the Raghus, the joy of the Raghu race, seeing her thus lamenting.

You were born in a noble family. You know and practise dharma. I shall tell you how this banishment has come about. Do listen.

My father, king Dasaratha, true to his promise, had earlier granted two great boons  to my mother Kaikeyi.

When the king was preparing for my consecration, she reminded him of the promise and in the name of righteousness he has been cornered.

I am to dwell in the Dandaka forest for fourteen years while father has appointed Bharata princeregent.

I have come to see you before departing for the desolate Dandaka forest. You should never praise me in the presence of Bharata because intellectuals cannot tolerate others being praised before them. You should never extol my virtues before him.

Never expect special treatment from Bharata. You can (continue to) stay with him (here) by conducting yourself in a favourable manner.

O Sita the king has conferred the hereditary regency on him. Therefore, O Sita, you must make efforts to win his favour, especially a king's.

I am leaving for the forest right away for fulfilling my father's pledge. O highminded Sita be steady.

O sinless, auspicious one engage yourself in vratas and fasting after my departure to the forest inhabited by ascetics.

You must rise in time and with the (household) gods duly worshipped, pay obeisance to my father, king Dasaratha.

You should give importance to duty(dharma) and show respect to my aged mother  who is emaciated due to grief.

In terms of love, affection and service, the rest of my mothers are all equal. Therefore, you must pay them due respect regularly.

What is more important is that you should look on Bharata as your brother and Satrughna as your son. They are dearer to me than my life.

Now Bharata is the king of the country and head of the family. Therefore, you should never do anything disagreeable to him.

Kings are gratified if they are served with zeal and good conduct. If the contrary happens, they get provoked.

Kings abandon (even) their own sons if they are harmful and receive capable people even if they are strangers.

O auspicious one live here by being obedient to king Bharata. Absorbed in righteousness, follow truth and (religious) vows.

O my beloved Sita I am going to the wild forest. Stay here and never cause displeasure to any one in any way. Could you carry out these words of mine?  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे षड्विंशस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the twentysixth sarga of Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.