When the sweettongued daughter of Videha (Sita) who deserved affection, heard this she was very angry out of her love (for Rama). She said these wordsto her husband (in reply)ः

O Rama why are you speaking so lightly? O prince if you hear these very same words (spoken to you), you will ridicule me.

O son of a noble monarch father, mother, brother, son or daughterinlaw (everybody) experiences the merit (of their past deeds) and receives what is due from destiny.

A wife alone, O best of men shares the destiny of her husband. I am also therefore, ordered to dwell in the forest. ( a command to you is a command to me).

It is not her father or mother, nor her son or herself, nor her friends but her husband alone gives a woman the permanent refuge in this or in the next world.

O son of the Raghus if you set out for the impenetrable forest now itself, I shall also go, walking ahead of you and crushing the thorns and (spiky) kusa grass (rendering the path comfortable for you to walk).

Do take me with you, O valiant one without hesitation. Dismiss all anger and envy (from your mind) like the leftover water after drinking (anger because she disobeys and envy because she, too, like Rama, is willing to brave the hazards of forest life). There is no fault on my part.

Every woman, everywhere be it on the top of mansions or in lovely palaces or flying in the sky should take shelter at his (her husband's) feet (or follow his footsteps).

I have been so instructed by my parents about diverse duties in all stages of life that I need not be told anything (about my duties) now.

I will also go to the forest, which is impassable, uninhabited, teeming with various kinds of animals and infested with tigers and wolves.

Free from any anxiety about the three worlds, my only concern will be my duties towards my husband. I shall dwell as happily in the forest as I did in my father's abode.

I shall wander with you, O heroic Rama in the honeyscented forest remaining selfpossessed, always doing your service, and observing the vow of celibacy.

O respector of individuals when you are capable of protecting other people in the forest, what of me?

There is no doudt that I shall go with you to the forest today. O distinguished one I cannot be restrained from this resolve.

Do not doubt that I shall not be able to live on fruits and roots or that I will create difficulty for you while living with you.

Living with you sans fear, O my sagacious husband, I wish to see the rivers, mountains, lakes and forests here and there.

I wish to enjoy the lotus lakes in full bloom, abounding in swans and ducks in the company of a brave husband like you.

Observing such vows and bathing daily in the lotus lakes, I shall be very much happy to sport with you, O largeeyed one

Thus living in your company for a thousand years or even a hundred thousand years, I shall not feel the passing of time. I shall not desire even heaven.

O Raghava, tiger among men, if I were given heaven to live in without you, even that I shall not covet.

I shall go (along with you) to the highly impenetrable forest infested with animals like  monkeys and elephants. I shall live in the forest in (full) discipline as in my father's abode, taking shelter at your feet.

Since I have no thought other than you and my heart is (irretrievably) attached to you  I have resolved to die if separated from you. Pray, be favourably disposed to take me. I shall not be a burden to you.

Although Sita was thus appealing, Rama, devoted to righteousness, was (still) unwilling to take her. In order to dissuade her, he began to describe to the mournful Sita the many hardships of forest life.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे सप्तविंशस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the twentyseventh sarga of Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.