Having heard the words of Rama, thus spoke Sita in a faint voice in sadness, with tears flowing incessantly from her eyesः

Understand that the difficulties of forest life described by you will be turned into advantages if they are accompanied by your affection.

O scion of the Raghu race antelopes, lions, elephants, tigers, sarabhas, birds, srimaras and other wild beasts wandering in the forest have not seen your beauty before. Now on seeing you, they will flee away. In fact, who will not be afraid of seeing an object of fear?.

In accordance with the command of the elders, I must accompany you to the forest. If I am separated from you, I will give up my life here itself.

If I am in your company, O Rama even the lord of the gods, Indra with all his might will not be able to hurt me.

Your salutary instruction to me, O Rama, is 'A woman cannot live without her husband'. This truth is greatly applicable to me.

O highly sagacious Rama I had also heard in my father's house long ago, from brahmins prophesing that some day I shall have certainly to dwell in the forest.

O mighty hero ever since I heard the prophesies from the brahmin palmists I am yearning to dwell in the forest.

Therefore, O my beloved I must certainly obtain such a command to dwell in the forest. I must accompany you to the forest and it cannot be otherwise.

I will go with you, true to the prediction of the brahmin. That time has come and let his prediction come to pass.

I am aware, O valiant one, that there are hardships of every kind in forest life. But they befall those whose senses are not under their control.

When I was young in my father's house, a holy female mendicant foretold in the presence of my mother that I would dwell in the forest (in this life).

Pleased with my long entreaties in the past to dwell with you in the forest, O lord, you had granted my desire.

Since then I have been counting time for this forest life. It pleases me to follow my valiant hero as he lives in the forest. Rama, prosperity to you

O my purehearted one by following my husband with love I shall become sinless, because my husband is my god.

My union with you, O highminded one, is auspicious even beyond death. A woman, given away by her parents in accordance with traditional offerings of water belongs to him even after death and lives with him. This is a statement from the Vedas quoted by famous brahmins.

Why don't you want to take to the forest your own wife who is loyal and devoted, and is of good conduct.

O Rama, I am faithful and devoted to you. I have equal disposition to happiness and sorrow. I equally share your prosperity and adversity. Therefore, you should take your wife (to the forest). In this time of distress.

If you do not wish to take your wife in this time of distress to the forest I shall die by consuming poison or throwing myself into fire or drowning in water.

Despite Sita's pleadings with him in various ways the mightyarmed Rama would not consent to take her to the desolate forest.

Thus spoken to (prevented), Sita was filled with grief and cried, drenching the ground with warm tears that fell from her eyes.

That selfpossessed scion of the Kakutstha dynasty consoled the copperredlipped Sita in several ways to dissuade her (from going to the forest).  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे एकोनत्रिंशस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the twentyninth sarga of Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.