After giving away plenty of wealth to brahmins in charity, Rama and Lakshmana along with Sita set out to see their father, king Dasaratha.

The pair of dazzling weapons held (by Rama and Lakshmana) looked splendid decorated with flower garlands by Sita.

The rich climbed their palaces and mansions, terraces of sevenstoried buildings and watched them sadly.

The streets were so thronged with multitudes of citizens that they were impassable. Therefore, people felt miserable and ascended their mansions and gazed at Rama.

Seeing Rama walking without the royal umbrella, people were very much shocked. They expressed their reaction in so many wordsः

Whenever Rama went out, powerful army of four divisions used to follow him. Today he is walking alone followed by Lakshmana and Sita.

Rama who enjoyed the comforts of affluence gratifies those who have desires. Out of veneration for righteousness, he does not want to prove his father false (to his promise).

It was not possible even for the creatures wandering in the sky (birds) to have a glimpse of Sita before. Now passersby walking the highway can behold her.

Sita who used to apply fragrant unguents and smear the body with redsandal  cream will now be exposed to the rain, the heat and the cold which will quickly discolour her body.

Surely king Dasaratha possessed of an evil spirit spoke the way he did today. Otherwise, should a king banish his beloved son?

Even a son who is bereft of virtues cannot be banished, what to say about Rama, who by good conduct alone has conquered the world.

Harmlessness, compassion, learning, good conduct, restraint of senses and selfcontrol, all these six qualities adorn Rama, the greatest among men.

Therefore, people are deeply pained to see Rama afflicted. They look like aquatic creatures in summer when the water dries up.

Just as severed at the root, an entire tree along with its fruits and flowers is destroyed, similarly the whole world gets afflicted when Rama, the ruler of the world, comes to harm.

Effulgent Rama personifies the essence of dharma. He is the root of (the tree of) humanity. The other people are connected with this tree like flowers, fruit, leaves and branches.

Let all of us without delay along with our wives and relations follow Rama, like Lakshmana, wherever he goes.

Deserting our gardens, fields and houses and experiencing the same joy and sorrow of the virtuous Rama, we shall follow him.

Let Kaikeyi take possession of our deserted and dilapidated homes with ruined courtyards which seem as though struck by calamities. They are drained of wealth and foodgrains, covered with dust and abandoned by the gods. There is no water or smoke (from kitchen). They are infested with rats. They stand unswept. There foodgrains lie around ratholes, and broken earthenwares lie scattered. There are no offerings, no sacrifices, no recitation of sacred hymns, no libations and no invocations.

Since the scion of the Raghu race is going to the forest, let that forest itself be our city and let the city deserted by us become the forest.

Let all the fanged creatures leave their lairs, birds and animals the mountain slopes, lions and elephants, their haunts due to the fear caused by our presence and occupy the city left by us (on seeing us deserting).

Let Kaikeyi along with her son and her relatives acquire that country which will be inhabited by birds and animals living on grass, fruits, and flesh. Withdrawn, we shall happily live in the forest along with Rama.

Such were the various words uttered by the people. Even after hearing them his (Rama's) mind remained unmoved (from his resolve).

Dutiful Rama, endowed with the prowess of an intoxicated elephant, approached the residence of his father that resembled from a distance the peak of mount Kailasa in splendour.

Rama entered the royal palace guarded by welltrained warriors and not from very far saw Sumantra who stood a picture of dejection.

Even after observing the people in grief, Rama did not reveal his sorrowful feelings. Bound by duty he went in as if with a smile to see his father.

Seeing Sumantra stricken with grief for the first time the magnanimous Rama, scion of the Ikshvaku dynasty, on the way to the forest waited there for his father to be informed of his arrival.

Rama, lover of righteousness, determined to go to the forest in obedience to his  father's command said to Sumantra, Inform the king of my arrival.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे त्रयस्त्रिंशस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the thirtythird sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.