Afflicted on account of the promise he had made, Dasaratha, descendant of the Ikshvakus heaved deep sighs again and again and with his eyes full of tears uttered these words to Sumantraः

O Sumantra arrange immediately four divisions of the army, wellequipped with precious stones to escort Rama in his journey to (the forest).

Let the sweettongued courtesans, opulent merchants with well spreadout merchandise make the army of my son graceful.

Bestow immense wealth on those who depended on Rama for their living and on the gallant youths with whom he used to sport. Send them along with the entourage.

Main weapons, citizens (bodyguards), carts, wanderers in the forest and fowlers wellacquainted with the forest shall follow Rama.

Hunting the elephants and antelopes, drinking forest honey, beholding several rivers on the way, Rama will not recollect the kingdom.

Let the entire contents of my granary and treasury follow Rama wherever he lives in the desolate forest.

Performing sacrifices in the holy places and liberally giving appropriate gifts, Rama will live happily in the forest in the company of sages.

(While) mightyarmed Bharata will rule Ayodhya, Rama be furnished with all objects of enjoyment.

While Dasaratha was saying these words, Kaikeyi was gripped by fear and her face looked pale. Even her voice got choked.

The dejected and frightened Kaikeyi with a dry countenance, looked at the king and saidः

O virtuous king Bharata will not take charge of the kingdom abandoned by men, drained of wealth and incapable of being enjoyed, like wine with its essence evaporated.

King Dasaratha heard the terribly cruel and shameless words of that largeeyed Kaikeyi, and saidः

O brutal Kaikeyi, you fastened me to the yoke and when I am drawing forward, why do you beat me? O vile woman why did you not prevent me in the beginning itself?

At these wrathful words of Dasaratha, Kaikeyi with redoubled fury replied to the kingः

In your own dynasty king Sagara prevented his wellknown eldest son Asamanjasa (from enjoying the kingdom). Rama also should depart in the same manner.

Hearing the words of Kaikeyi, Dasaratha could say only 'shame'. All the people felt ashamed, but Kaikeyi could not understand this.

An aged minister named Siddhartha who justified his name, highly respected by the king said this to Kaikeyiः

That wickedminded Asamanjasa used to seize the children playing on the street and amuse himself by hurling them in the waters of river Sarayu.

Watching it, all the enraged citizens said to the king, 'O enhancer of the prosperity of the kingdom, either you choose Asamanjasa or us'.

The king then asked them, 'Why this fear?'. And the citizens respondedः

That insane (Asamanjasa) while throwing our children who were playing around into Sarayu river in his insanity derived incomparable pleasure'.

That king (Sagara) heard the words of the citizens and with the intention of doing good to them, banished that malevolent son.

Then the father made him and his wife climb a carriage with the clothes they had at the time on them and at once ordered his servants to banish him for life.

Like an evildoer wandering about in different directions, holding a spade and a basket in his hand, he went about digging the impenetrable mountains.

Highly righteous king Sagara thus banished his son. What sin has Rama committed to secure a similar banishment?

We see no fault in Rama. Unlike the stain in the Moon it is difficult to find any blemish in him.

O Kaikeyi speak truly if you find any fault in this scion of the Raghu race (Rama). Then he will be exiled.

The act of banishment of an innocent one walking the righteous path is like destroying the brilliance of Indra by restraining his righteousness.

O Devi, there is no use obstructing Rama's prosperity. O one with an auspicious countenance, save yourself from the censure of the world.

Having heard Siddhartha, the king, stricken with grief, said to Kaikeyi in a gradually  feeble voice.

O Kaikeyi of vicious behaviour, you do not aceept even the words of Siddhartha. You woman of wicked acts, having adopted vile ways, and abjured the right path cannot know what is good either for you or for me.

Abandoning this kingdom, these comforts and this wealth, I shall follow Rama. Enjoy the kingdom for a long time happily along with king Bharata.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे षट्त्रिंशस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the thirtysixth sarga of Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.