On hearing the minister, Rama who knew how to be polite spoke these words to Dasaratha humblyः

O king giving up pleasures and attachments altogether I am going to live on whatever is available in the forest. What is the use of followers?

Having given away the best of elephants, will any one be interested in the rope tied to its girth? Why should one have any attachment for the rope after he has given up the elephant?

O best among the virtuous O lord of the world, I do not have any use for this army. I am giving away everything (to Bharata). Bring the bark only.

I am going to the forest to live there for fourteen years. Bring me two thingsः a basket and a crowbar.

Thereupon in the assembly of people, without any sense of shame Kaikeyi herself brought the bark robes and said to the son of the Raghus (Rama), Wear it.

The tiger among men (Rama) received the bark robes from Kaikeyi and putting off the fine apparel wore the robes of an ascetic.

Lakshmana also removed his auspicious raiment in front (presence) of his father and accepted (put on) the robes of an ascetic.

Then Sita in silk clothes glanced at the bark robes meant for her to wear and was frightened like a doe seeing a (fowler's) snare.

Sita of auspicious nature who knew her duties and understood righteousness, took the garments made of kusa grass from Kaikeyi. With a sense of abashment her eyes suffused with tears, she said to her husband who was the very image of the king of gandharvas.

Sita, unacquainted with wearing bark robes, asked Rama, perplexed 'How do the sages who live in the forest wear bark garment?'.

The daughter of Janaka, placed one end of the garment round her neck and held the other in her hand, and stood ashamed as she did not know what to do next.

Rama, foremost among protectors of righteousness, came forward quickly and fastened the bark himself over her silk garment.

Beholding Rama fastening the bark garment on Sita, the women of the inner apartment shed tears from their eyes.

Profoundly distressed, they said to Rama glowing with burning lustre O dear, no one has ordered this highminded Sita to dwell in the forest.

In obedience to the words of your father, O lord you are going to the forest. Till you return, please allow us to have her (Sita's) audience.

Go, O son to the forest with Lakshmana as your companion. (But) this auspicious Sita, will not be able to live in the jungle like a hermit.

Do accede to our prayer. Let lovely Sita stay with us as you, O son faithful to your  duty, will not like to remain here.

While Rama was listening to such words uttered by them, he got the bark robes fastened round Sita who was of similar nature.

When Sita wore the bark garments, Vasistha, the king's preceptor who was watching this restrained her (Sita) and said to Kaikeyiः

.  You are exceeding all limits of decency O Kaikeyi your motive is evil. You are a disgrace to the race You have deceived the king and your behaviour does not conform to the standards (of righteousness).

You are devoid of good conduct, O Kaikeyi Divine Sita need not go to the forest. Remaining here she should occupy the royal throne of Rama.

For every householder, his wife is the soul. Since Sita is the soul of Rama, she can rule this earth.

Otherwise, if Sita goes with Rama to the forest, all of us along with the entire city will follow.

The guardians of the harem, its patron king Dasaratha with his retinue and, the people of this city will go wherever Rama lives with his wife.

Wandering in the forest and wearing bark, Satrughna and Bharata will live in the company of their elder brother (Rama) in the jungle.

Intent upon doing harm to the people with your vile behaviour, you alone rule this kingdom full of trees and deserted by men.

That is not a kingdom where Rama does not rule. If Rama lives in the forest, that shall be the kingdom.

If Bharata is truly born to the king, he will not rule the kingdom which has not been bestowed on him (wholeheartedly) by his father. Nor will he live like a son to you.

Even if you were to fly from earth to sky, Bharata who knows the traditions of his father's dynasty, will not act otherwise.

Therefore, by greedily guarding your son's interest you are doing him harm. There is none in this world who will not follow Rama.

Today you shall see, O Kaikeyi, flocks of cattle, elephants, deer and birds following Rama, even the trees bending towards him.

O Kaikeyi remove those bark robes and bestow on your daughterinlaw precious ornaments. She was not ordained to wear the bark. Vaisishta, saying so, prevented Sita from wearing that garment.

O Kaikeyi, you asked that Rama only should dwell in the forest (wearing bark robes). Therefore let Sita, adorn her body daily, while she lives in the forest with Rama.

Equipped with excellent chariots, attendants, garments, and all other needs let the princess (Sita) go. While seeking boons, you did not include Sita.

(Though) Vasistha, endowed with matchless power, the preceptor of the king and foremost among the brahmins thus expressed himself, Sita was not willing to swerve from her resolve in order to serve her beloved husband.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे सप्तत्रिंशस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the thirtyseventh sarga of Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.