The citizens held out their palms folded like lotuses in reverence and urged king Dasaratha in all possible ways (to coronate Rama). He reciprocated their respect with words preasing and beneficial to themः

I am immensely happy that you have added to my incomparable resilience with your desire to see my beloved eldest son installed heirapparent.

﻿  Having honoured them (the invitees) in return for their response, king Dasaratha addressed Vasistha, Vamadeva and other brahmins.

This auspicious month of Chaitra is sacred with its blossoming groves. Let all the arrangements be made for the installation of Rama as heirapparent. On hearing this, all the members of the assembly applauded the king tumultously.

With the tumult gradually calmed down, the lord of the people, the king (Dasaratha) spoke this to Vasistha, a tiger among asceticsः

O revered one, you should issue appropriate orders to keep ready the necessary articles required for the performance of installation ceremony of Rama.

Hearing the words of the king, Vasistha, best of the brahmins thus ordered the counsellors who stood in front of the king with folded palmsः

﻿  By tomorrow early morning arrange in the place set aside for sacred fire in the king's palace gold and other metals, gems, articles of worship, also herbs, garlands of white flowers, roasted corn, honey and clarified butter in separate containers, fresh clothes, chariot, weapons of every kind, army of four divisions, an elephant possessing auspicious marks, white fans made of Yak's hair, a standard, white parasol, a hundred golden vessels shining like fire, a bull with goldplated horns and a tiger skin.

By tomorrow early morning arrange in the place set aside for sacred fire in the king's palace gold and other metals, gems, articles of worship, also herbs, garlands  of white flowers, roasted corn, honey and clarified butter in separate containers, fresh clothes, chariot, weapons of every kind, army of four divisions, an elephant possessing auspicious marks, white fans made of Yak's hair, a standard, white parasol, a hundred golden vessels shining like fire, a bull with goldplated horns and a tiger skin.

Even the smallest items required be arranged. Let the gates of the inner apartment and of the entire city be decorated with sandalpaste and garlands. Let fragrant incense be burnt for worship.

Arrange fine rice cooked with milk and curd sufficient for a hundred thousand brahmins to eat to their heart's content.

At dawn tomorrow the best of brahmins be honoured with cooked rice clarified butter, curd, roasted corn and gifts in abundance.

As soon as the Sun rises tomorrow, arrangements be made for Swastivachana (a benedictory utterance). Brahmins be invited and seats provided to them.

Banners be fastened and royal highways be sprinkled with water. All actors and beautifully adorned courtesans should reach the second inner apartment of the king's residence and remain seated there.

Persons to cater food and other eatables and to hold garlands and gifts be stationed at all temples and other places of worship.

Let all the warriors in fresh clothes, armed with long swords and fully alert enter the courtyard of the glorious king.

The two highly selfdisciplined ascetics (Vasistha and Vamadeva), having ordered the tasks to be performed and whatever remained to be done reported to the king.

Satisfied with the arrangements, the two illustrious brahmins(Vasistha and Vamadeva) approached the lord of the earth (Dasaratha) with delight and said All things have been arranged in accordance with your word of command.

Thereafter the glorious king said to Sumantra, Bring immediately the selfpossessed Rama.

In response to the king's command Sumantra, the best of charioteers said, 'so be it' and fetched Rama in a chariot.

After Sumantra had gone, the kings from eastern, northern, western, southern nonAryan and Aryan countries, rulers from forests and mountains paid homage to king Dasaratha, as devatas do to Indra.

The rajarsi, (Dasaratha), seated among the kings like Indra amidst maruts, beheld his son Rama sitting in a chariot and approaching him.

Rama appeared as the very image of king of the gandharvas known for his courage in this world. With his long arms, he was extremely handsome with a countenance of the colour of moonstone possessed of immense strength, he walked with the gait of an intoxicated elephant. He captivated the eyes and hearts of men with his beauty and generosity. He looked like Parjanya (raingod), gladdening men scorched by heat. Even after (intensely) gazing at Rama approaching, the king (Dasaratha) was not satiated.

﻿  Sumantra assisted Rama while alighting from that splendid chariot and followed him with folded palms as Rama was proceeding towards his father.

﻿  Best among men, Rama accompanied by charioteer Sumantra ascended that palace that was lofty as the peak of Kailasa mountain in order to see the king.

Rama, approached his father with folded palms and bowed low near him, pronounced his (own) name and touched his father's feet with reverence.

Seeing his beloved son Rama who was standing by his side with folded hands in supplication, king Dasaratha, held his folded hands and drew him near and embraced him.

The king (Dasaratha) offered Rama a seat on the lofty, glorious throne splendidly decorated with gold and gems.

The lofty seat Rama occupied was illuminated by him resplenderce like mount Meru in the translucent rays of the morning Sun.

﻿  That assembly was illumined by (the presence of) Rama like the Moon dazzling the clear autumnal sky bespangled with sparkling planets and stars.

The king was delighted to see his beloved son as though he saw his own reflection adorning a mirror.

The best among fathers, he (Dasaratha) said these words to his son with a smile, like Kasyapa addressing Devendra.

A worthy son of my worthy eldest wife, O Rama, your great virtues have endeared you to me.

As you have endeared yourself to these subjects with your virtues, you shall assume the office of heirapparent when Pushya star is in conjunction with the Moon.

Admittedly gentle by nature, you are gifted with virtues. O son, even though virtuous, I shall offer you counsel for your good out of affection for you.

With humility, always keep your senses under control. Keep off all violations arising out of lust and anger.

With your behaviour keep the ministers and the people satisfied by means direct or indirect.

You shall rule the earth by filling granaries of foodgrains and arsenals and keeping the subjects loyal and contented. The friends of such a person will memain pleased like devatas with nectar. Hence conduct yourself with your mind under control.

﻿  Having heard this, Rama's friends quickly reported the matter to Kausalya so that she might be happy.

﻿  The foremost of women, Kausalya ordered gifts of gold, cows and various kinds of gems to be given to the messengers who brought this good tiding.

Having paid his obeisance to the king, Rama ascended the chariot amidst the acclaim of multitudes of men and left for his splendid abode.

On hearing such pronouncement by the king, the citizens also felt they have got something beneficial for themselves. They took leave of the king (Dasaratha) and hastening home, full of joy, began worshipping their gods.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे तृतीयस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the third sarga of Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.