Struck by the grief of her son's departure, Kausalya looked at the king who lay on the couch completely exhausted and said to him.

Moving crookedly like a snake, Kaikeyi has released her venom on Rama, the best among men. Now she will move about freely like a sheserpent that has cast off its slough.

Having banished Rama, she is now happy with her desires fulfilled. And like a vicious serpent living in the house she will again frighten me.

It would have been better had I offered her my son as a slave. He would have lived on in the house by doing his duties and begging his food in the city.

You have thrown away Rama from his place as per the whim of Kaikeyi, like the share of offering meant for gods given away to rakshasas by the sacrificers on the new Moon days.

My mightyarmed son, a great archer and a hero, Rama whose gait is like that of the king of elephants, must be entering the forest along with his consort Sita and Lakshmana.

You have banished them as per the desire of Kaikeyi. What will be their plight in the forest, for they have never experienced any hardship earlier

Deprived of all costly things they have been banished at the tender age of youth, a time for enjoying their lives. How will they lead a miserable life subsisting on fruits and roots?

Will there ever be that auspicious moment to end my sorrow? When I can see Rama here along with his wife and brother?

When will the city of Ayodhya attain that glory when having heard that both the brave brothers have come back the people will rejoice and fill it with uplifted banners?

When will, like the swelling sea on a full Moon day, the city hail the return of Rama and Lakshmana, the best among men?

When will the mightyarmed hero (Rama) enter the city of Ayodhya with Sita in front in the chariot, like a bull following the cow?

When will the people in their thousands shower the parched grain on the highway when my sons (Rama and Lakshmana), subduers of enemies, enter the city?

When shall I see both of them wearing auspicious earrings and holding poweful weapons (bows) and swords high, like two mountain peaks?

When will I see them delightfully moving round the city with young brahmin girls offering them flowers and fruits.

When will Rama, the knower of righteousness, possessing the lustre of gods, and fully mature in age and wisdom come back to me playfully like a threeyearold boy?

O valiant one, in my previous birth I must have undoubtedly hacked off the udders of cows when the calves were thirsting for milk from their mothers.

O best of men I have been forcibly separated from my affectionate son by Kaikeyi just like a cow from its calf by a lion.

I cannot live without my only son who is adept in all scriptures and endowed with all virtues.

Without seeing my beloved son, longarmed and mighty, I have but little strength to live in this world.

I am consumed by this blazing fire of grief caused by separation from my son like the earth scorched in summer by the Sungod with his oppressive rays  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे त्रिचत्वारिंशस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the fortythird sarga of Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.