On reaching the foot of the tree, Rama offered oblations to Sandhya of the west. And then he who is the best in keeping people in good humour said to Lakshmanaः

We will have to spend this first night without Sumantra and away from human habitation. (Yet) you need not worry.

O Lakshmana, from now on we must be sleeplessly vigilant at night. The welfare and safety of Sita depend on us both.

O Lakshmana, we will have to somehow pass this night, sleeping on the ground spread with whatever we have procured.

Rama who deserved a luxurious bed lay down on the ground and uttered these beneficial words to Lakshamanaः

O Lakshmana, the maharaja must be having a painful sleep tonight. But Kaikeyi with her desires fulfilled, ought to feel satisfied.

After the arrival of Bharata, I hope queen Kaikeyi does not deprive the king of his life for the sake of the kingdom?

That lustful king, having come under the hold of Kaikeyi, has been deprived of my presence. What can that forlorn and aged king do?

Reflecting on the calamity and mental aberration of the king, I think passion is stronger than wealth and righteousness.

O Lakshmana, will even an illiterate man for the sake of a woman ever abandon his son like me who is faithful and obedient, as did my father?

Bharata, son of Kaikeyi, with his wife will alone enjoy like an emperor this kingdom of Kosala full of happy people.

The king is advanced in age and I have to dwell in the forest. Therefore, Bharata  alone will be the chief of this entire kingdom.

Any king who abandons dharma and artha and adopts a life of pleasure will very soon reach this state as Dasaratha has attained.

O handsome Lakshmana I think Kaikeyi has come to our house for the destruction of Dasaratha, for my banishment and enthronement of Bharata in the kingdom.

Intoxicated with her good fortune will not Kaikeyi torment Kausalya and Sumitra for my sake?

O Lakshmana, because of me mother Sumitra should not live in sorrow. Therefore, tomorrow morning go back to Ayodhya from here itself.

I shall go with Sita into the Dandaka forest and you be the protector of the helpless, Kausalya.

Kaikeyi who is a woman of heinous deeds may follow, out of hostility, an unjust way in respect of my mother. In that case my mother may be entrusted to the care of Bharata who is righteous.

O Lakshmana, surely in one of her previous births did my mother separate women from their sons. That is why this (calamity) has befallen her.

Kausalya nurtured me for a long time and reared me with great difficulty. When she was going to enjoy the fruits of her labour, I have been separated from her. Fie upon me

O Lakshmana, I am causing endless sorrow to my mother. May no mother give birth to a son like me

(On hearing my banishment) her myna would say to her parrot, 'O parrot, bite the foot of the enemy (Kaikeyi)'. I think that bird is a greater source of joy to my mother than I, O Lakshmana

My mother has less fortune and more grief like a woman without a son, O Lakshmana, subduer of enemies For her, what is the use of a son like me who cannot render any service to her?

My mother is unlucky as she has been separated from me. Extremely distressed, she must have plunged into an ocean of grief.

Once enraged, O Lakshmana I can overpower Ayodhya, even the whole world all by myself with my arrows. But exhibition of prowess without any reason is not desirable.

O sinless one, I did not get myself coronated owing to fear of unrighteous conduct and fear of the other world.

Like this and in many other ways Rama lamented pitifully in that desolate forest. When his face was filled with tears, he sat silently in the night.

Lakshmana consoled Rama who ceased to lament like fire with extinguished flames or like a motionless seaः

O Rama, foremost of warriors, it is certain that since your departure, the city of Ayodhya must be lustreless like night without the Moon.

This is not the way you should lament, O Rama. O foremost of men, by doing so you are disheartening me and Sita as well.

Without you Sita or I will not survive even for a moment like a fish taken out of  water, O Rama

Without you, O Rama, tormentor of enemies, I wish to see neither father nor Satrughna nor Sumitra nor even heaven itself

Thereafter Rama and Sita, the duo, nurturers of righteousness, from their comfortable seats moved to the bed wellmade under the banyan tree not far (from there where they were sitting) and lay down (to sleep).

Rama, the tormentor of enemies, listened, out of love, to the excellent and copious words of Lakshmana and permitted him to live in the forest for the entire period of fourteen years by observing the prescribed code of conduct as enjoined on life in the forest.

Then the two mighty perpetuators of the Raghu race, who were like two lions dwelling on the slopes of mountains, lived in that lonely forest without fear or hesitation.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे त्रिपञ्चाशस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the fiftythird sarga of Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.