Until Rama reached the southern bank, Guha kept talking with Sumantra for long and returned home with great sorrow.

Positioned there, they could mark their arrival at Bharadwaja's at Prayaga, their stay (nighthalt) and their onward journey to Chitrakuta mountain.

Permitted by Rama to leave, Sumantra harnessed the best of horses and set out for the city of Ayodhya with a heavy heart.

Beholding the fragrancefilled forests, rivers, lakes, villages and towns on the way, Sumantra quickly crossed them.

The charioteer reached Ayodhya on the third day at dusk and found the city cheerless.

Beholding the silent city, almost empty, the deeply depressed Sumantra, afflicted with gushing tears reflectedः

Has the city along with its elephants, horses, people and its king perished in the fire of grief for Rama?

Absorbed in these thoughts, the charioteer came to the citygate, carried by the swiftfooted horses, and quickly entered the city.

Meanwhile as the charioteer was moving towards the city, hundreds and thousands of men came pouring towards him enquiring, 'Where is Rama?'

I took leave of the great, righteous Rama on the bank of the Ganga and have returned with his permission. (replied Sumantra).

Hearing that they had (the trio) crossed the river Ganga, the people, with their faces filled with tears sighed and saying 'Fie upon us Alas, Rama' cried out aloud.

He saw them gathering in groups, saying, Henceforth we will not be able to see Rama and without him, we are lost indeed.

No longer will we see Rama at sacrifices, weddings, great assemblies and at places of charitable activity.

Rama looked after his people like a father always thinking what was good for them, dear to them and comfortable to them.

(He) heard wailings of women looking through the window and of the people in marketplaces burning with sorrow over Rama's exile.

Sumantra with his face muffled, drove along the highway straight to the palace of king Dasaratha.

Quickly alighting from the chariot, he entered the king's palace and crossed the seven courtyards overcrowded with people.

Women from mansions, sevenstoried buildings and from royal palaces, sighted him and pained at not seeing Rama cried out 'Alas, Alas'.

The women in great anguish stood silently looking at one another, their large eyes  flooded with overflowing tears.

From different spots in the palace, Sumantra heard the sobs and whispers of Dasaratha's wives who were tormented with the sorrow of Rama's exile.

The charioteer left with Rama and returned without him. What can he say to the wailing Kausalya?

I think it is indeed difficult for Kausalya to live wherever and whichever way she tries as she has been separated from her son. (the queens said).

Listening to the correct words of the king's wives, he immediately entered the palace as if in flames (of grief).

On entering the eighth courtyard, he saw in a pale white chamber king Dasaratha desolate, anguished and withered with the sorrow of separation from his son.

Sumantra approached the king who was seated, paid obeisance to him and conveyed Rama's words verbatim.

The king silently listened to Rama's message. Bewildered and tormented by the grief of Rama's absence, he fell down on the ground in a swoon.

The moment the lord of the earth fell down on the ground unconscious, the women in the inner apartment burst into tears, raising their arms.

Having seen her husband collapsed on the ground, Kausalya assisted by Sumitra lifted him up and said to him thusः

O distinguished king, why are you not enquiring from the messenger about him (Rama) who is capable of performing arduous tasks?

O descendant of the Raghus are you ashamed of having done an injustice? Arise. you may be a blessed one (for fulfilling your promise). If you grieve, none will help you.

Kaikeyi for fear of whom you dare not ask the charioteer about Rama, O king is not here. You may speak to him without fear.

Absorbed in grief, Kausalya spoke to the maharaja in a voice choked with tears and then collapsed on the floor.

All those women saw weeping Kausalya as well as their husband fallen on the ground and wailed loudly in a chorus.

Having heard the sound emanating from the inner apartment, people, old, young and women, of the city lamented. The city was crowded again.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे सप्तपञ्चाशस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the fiftyseventh sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.