When the king regained his consciousness and was consoled, he summoned the charioteer to hear news about Rama.

Then the charioteer with folded palms approached the king who, deeply afflicted with grief and pain, was brooding over Rama alone. Aged Dasaratha was heaving deep sighs like a newlycaptured, indisposed elephant.

Seeing the dejected charioteer standing before him, the desolate king covered all over with dust and his face bathed in tears, said to him in extreme griefः

O charioteer Rama is rightous and he is acustoomed to all sorts of comfort. Taking refuge at the foot of a tree how shall he live and what shall he eat?

How can the son of the guardian of the earth who is accustomed to a comfortable bed and not to undeserved suffering lie down on the ground like an orphan, O Sumantra

Wherever Rama went, elephants, chariots and footsoldiers followed him. How can he (now) live in the desolate forest where he has taken refuge?

How can the two young men along with Vaidehi live in the forest infested with black cobras and wicked, wild animals?

O Sumantra how did those two princes along with pitiable, delicate Sita, alight from the chariot, and enter the forest on foot?

You are blessed indeed, O charioteer to have seen my sons entering the outskirts of the forest like Aswinis stepping into the region of the Mandara mountain.

Upon reaching the forest, O Sumantra what did Rama, Lakshmana and Sita say?

Tell me, O charioteer where Rama sat, where he slept, what (food) he ate. Only your words will enable me to live like Yayati among saints.

Thus questioned by the king the charioteer, his voice choked with tears and words faltering in grief, addressed the kingः

With palms folded and head bowed, O great king Rama offered his salutations to you in confirmity with righteousness and said to meः

'Convey on my behalf, O charioteer to my illustrious father who is known for his selfknowledge, and is worthy of homage, that I am saluting his feet with my head bowed.

'On my behalf convey, O charioteer, without any distinction, my salutations to all the  women befitting their status and tell them I was enquiring about their wellbeing.

'Convey my mother carefully my saluations and my wellbeing and tell herः

'O mother, adhering to the righteous path and performing in time the rituals in the chamber of sacrificial fire, offer your services at the feet of king Dasaratha as if he were a god.

'O mother, conduct yourself with other mothers without pride and egoism. Ensure that venerable Kaikeyi remains welldisposed towards the king.

'Behave towards young Bharata as to a king. Irrespective of age, a king is a king. (Hence should be honoured). You should keep this rajadharma (royal prerogative) in mind.

'Tell Bharata of my welfare and tell him on my behalf that he should honour all our mothers equally.



'The king is advanced in age. Do not restrict him in any manner. Carry out his orders as prince regent, and live happily'.

Shedding profuse tears, Rama continued, 'Look after my mother who is covetous of her son as your own mother'.

While saying this the red lotuslike eyes of illustrious Rama streamed with tears, O maharaja

But Lakshmana, seething with anger and sighing said, 'For what offence has this king's son been banished'?

'The king, too, submitting to the trash command of Kaikeyi has perpetrated an act, just or unjust (he knows better), for which we are made to suffer so much.

'Whether it was out of greed (for the kingdom) or for (the execution of) the boon bestowed, this act of banishment is by all means wicked'.

'Or he might have thought he is the overlord and can do as he likes. (Or, he might have done this for fear of God) Otherwise, I do not see any reason for the abandonment of Rama'.

'Unjustly, foolishly and without (proper) consideration Rama has been banished. This will (definitely) cause sorrow'.

'I do not regard the great king as my father. Rama alone is my brother, protector, friend and father.

'How can anyone in this world be pleased with you for deserting Rama, the beloved of all, and ever devoted to their welfare?

'Having banished the righteous Rama, the delight of all subjects and, thereby,  antagonizing the entire world, how can you claim to be their king?'

O great king as for that sensitive Janaki, she stood sighing, stupefied and oblivious (of the past), yet smiling as though her mind was possessed by an evil spirit.

That glorious princess Sita who had never experienced any adversity earlier, weeping with sorrow, could not even speak to me anything.

When she saw me leaving, she looked at her husband with a dry (pale) face and suddenly burst into tears.

Supported by Lakshmana's arms, Rama stood, his face streaming with tears and palms folded, while the wretched Sita, glaring at me and the royal chariot, weeping.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे अष्टपञ्चाशस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the fiftyeighth sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.