The king having instructed Rama summoned Vasistha, the priest and spoke to him about the coronation that was to take place on the following day

Could you, O sage, whose wealth is asceticism go to Rama engaged in strict observance of vows and advise him along with Sita, my daughterinlaw to undertake fast for securing prosperity, fame and kingdom.

Venerabel Vasistha, the best amongst the knowers of the Vedas, skilled in mantras and firm in his vows said to the king, 'Be it so.' Thereafter, mounted on the best of the chariots befitting a brahmin, with horses harnesed he proceeded personally to the abode of Rama to ask him to undertake a fast in accompaniment with mantras preceding the installation ceremony.

Having crossed the three courtyards in the chariot, that foremost of ascetics (Vasistha) entered Rams's abode, shining like a mass of white clouds.

Seeing the venerable sage(Vasitha) arrive, Rama quickly came out of his abode in great excitement to receive him with honour.

Hastening with rapid strides, Rama approached the chariot of the sagacious Vasistha and personally helped him alight from the chariot.

The family priest Vasistha also, having gratified him by enquiring about his welfare, said thus to Rama, who was humble and lovableः

O Rama, welldisposed towards you, your father will declare you heirapparent. Do undertake fast today, along with Sita.

Your father, king Dasaratha, will be pleased to coronate you as heirapparent early tomorrow morning as Nahusa did (to his son) Yayati.

The ascetic (Vasistha) having thus spoken to Rama made him undertake fast along with Sita in accompaniment with sacred hymns.

Thereafter, Vasistha, preceptor of the king duly honoured by the descendant of Kakutstha (Rama) left his abode.

Rama also sat for a while in the company of his sweettongued friends and duly honoured by them in every way took leave of them and entered his apartment.

﻿  The residence of Rama, full of cheerful men and women, looked splendid like a lake with fullblown lotuses flocked by multitudes of intoxicated birds.

Vasistha thereafter emerged from the abode of Rama resembling a royal palace and beheld the highways filled with people.

The royal highways in the city of Ayodhya were jammed on all sides with groups of curious people.

The highways resembled the sea and the exultation of the multitudes, the roar that emanated from the clashing of waves.

On that day, the thoroughfares of the city of Ayodhya, surrounded with (pleasure) gardens, were sprinkled with water and swept. The flags (on the top) of the houses were raised high.

﻿  Then all the people living in Ayodhya including women, children and aged alike wishing to see the coronation of Rama eagerly waited for the sunrise.

﻿  People were anxious to witness that great festival of Ayodhya which was to them (precious) like an ornament and a source of immense joy.

The priest (Vasistha), beholding the overcrowded highway forced his passage through the crowds of men dividing them into two tracts and slowly entered the royal palace.

Having ascended the royal palace resembling the peak of a mountain covered with white clouds, Vasistha approached the king like Brihaspati meeting Indra.

On seeing Vasistha the king descended from the throne and enquired whether he had performed the mission to which the ascetic replied affirmatively.

All those present in the assembly with him (the king) also got up from their seats as he (Dasaratha) did and paid their obeisance to Vasistha.

The king then, dully permitted by the preceptor, disposed the assembly of men and stepped into his inner apartment, like a lion entering the cave of a mountain.

The king entered the inner apartment thronged with excellently attired women which looked like the palace of Mahendra. He resembled the beautiful Moon that illuminates the sky crowded with stars.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे पञ्चमस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the fifth sarga of Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.