Not finding his father in his abode, Bharata went to see his mother in her apartment.

On seeing her son, who was sent away, presently arriving, the delighted Kaikeyi sprang up from her golden seat.

On entering home the righteous Bharata found it devoid of cheer and touched the auspicious feet of his mother (with reverence).

Kaikeyi, gave her illustrious son Bharata a hug, kissed him on his forehead, made him rest on her lap and began her query.

How many nights have you spent (on the way) since you left your noble grandfather's residence? Hasn't the hurried journey (over such a long distance) on the chariot left you exhausted?

﻿  My son are your revered grandfather and your maternal uncle Yudhajit doing well? Did you have a pleasant time during the sojourn? You should tell me all this.

Thus asked lovingly by his mother Kaikeyi, the lotuseyed Bharata, the king's delight narrated everything to her.

This is the seventh night since I left my noble grandsire's residence. My mother's father, king of Kekaya and my maternal uncle Yudhajit are doing well.

The (horses carrying) the wealth including the gems which the king (of Kekaya), the subduer of enemies had bestowed on me were exhausted on the way. Therefore I have come in advance.

Urged upon by the messengers carrying out the orders of the king, I have come. You, O mother, should answer the questions. I wish to ask you.

Your goldbedecked couch, worthy of resting lies empty. None of the attendants of the Ikshvakus look cheerful.

﻿  I had come here with the hope to see king Dasaratha who spends most of his time in my mother's residence. But today I do not see him .

I would like to pay obeisance at my father's feet. Will you answer my question, O mother, and tell me regarding his whereabouts? Or perchance could he be at the residence of my eldest mother Kausalya?

In spite of knowing everything, Kaikeyi actuated by greed for the kingdom, broke the unpleasant and dreadful news as if it were pleasing to Bharata, who was ignorant of what had transpired.

﻿  Your highsouled, brilliant father ever engaged in performing sacrifices and a refuge for the virtuous people, went the inevitable way every living being must follow (attained heaven).

On hearing these words, he (Bharata), born of a righteous race and endowed with purity of character was shattered by the immense grief of his father's demise and dropped down instantaneously on the floor.

The mightyarmed, valiant Bharata, uttering pitiable words, evoking compassion. Alas, I am finished fell down at once throwing up his arms.

Overwhelmed with grief, radiant Bharata reeling with delusion due to sorrow, lamented over the death of his father.

This couch of my father once used to shine like the spotless night sky irradiated by the autumnal Moon.

But today this couch without my sagacious father no longer shines like the sky without the Moon or like the sea evaporated.

﻿﻿  Bharata, the foremost among the victorious, clearing his tearchoked throat and covering his auspicious countenance with raiment, wept in profound distress with tears overflowing.

Anguished and griefstricken, he who resembled the gods, fell down on the ground like a trunk of the sala tree in the forest severed by an axe. Seeing her son who was like a mighty elephant or like the Sun or the Moon, Kaikeyi lifted him up from the ground and spoke these wordsः

O illustrious prince arise, arise. Why are you lying down on the floor? Learned people like you, who are worthy of honour in the assembly ought not to grieve like this.

﻿  O highly intelligent one, by your wisdom, virtuous conduct and scriptural knowledge you are entitled to dispense charity and perform sacrifices. You will always shine incessantly like light of the Sun.

Bharata engulfed in profuse sorrow wept for a long time rolling on the ground and then said these words in reply to his motherः

Thinking that the king is about to consecrate Rama or perform some sacrifice, I undertook the journey in great delight.

Now everything has turned out to be different. My mind is shattered.I no longer behold my father who is ever intent on my welfare and happiness.

O mother what ailment caused the king's death before I could return? How fortunate are Rama and others by whom the last rites of my father were performed

﻿  Surely the illustrious maharaja is not aware of my arrival. Otherwise he would have quickly bent my head and kissed me on my forehead.

﻿  Where is that hand of my father of unwearied actions, the hand that would wipe away the dust from my person with a pleasant touch?

Announce at once my arrival to the wise Rama, the man of unwearied actions, my brother, father and friend whose slave I am.

﻿﻿  To one who knows the ways of righteousness the elder brother is (like) the father. Indeed, he (Rama) is my refuge and I shall hold his feet now.

﻿﻿﻿  What did my father, the noble king, conversant with righteous conduct, true, to his vows, one who always conducted himself in a righteous manner, whose truth was his prowess (at the time of his death)?

I want to hear the exact words of my father's last message to me. Thus questioned (by Bharata), Kaikeyi related the exact factsः

The magnanimous king, the foremost of those who attained the excellent state after, death, went to the other world, lamenting 'O Rama, O Sita, O Lakshamana'.

Your father, caught by the noose of death, like a great elephant bound by cords, uttered these last wordsः

'Those men who will see Rama returning home along with Sita and mightyarmed Lakshmana, will have their desires fulfilled.'

Bharata was more distraught on hearing the words that conveyed the second unpleasant tidings. With downcast countenance, he again enquired of his mother thusः

﻿  Where has righteous Rama who enhances the delight of Kausalya along with his brother Lakshmana and Sita gone now?

Thus questioned, his mother started relating the exact events, presuming them to be pleasant tidings (for Bharata).

O my son, prince Rama attired in garments of bark along with Sita and followed by Lakshmana left for the great Dandaka forest.

Conscious of the glory of his race, Bharata continued to enquire if there was any unrighteous conduct on the part of his brother.

I hope Rama did not seize the wealth of any brahmin nor did any harm to an innocent person, whether rich or poor.

I hope he did not covet another man's wife. Like a sinner who had slain a child in embryo why has he been banished to Dandaka forest?

﻿  Then the capricious mother, with the same feminine disposition which she had displayed earlier, started giving a faithful account of all her deeds.

On hearing the words of great Bharata, that foolish woman Kaikeyi thinking herself to be wise, cheerfully saidः

Rama did not rob any brahmin of even a little wealth nor did he harm any innocent man, whether rich or poor. He never casts his eyes on another's wife.

My son, I on hearing of Rama's consecration asked your father to confer the kingdom on you and banish Rama.

Your father, faithful to his word, banished Rama along with Lakshmana and Sita.

The renowned ruler of the earth (king Dasaratha), unable to behold (the sorry state of) his beloved son and stricken by filial grief, merged into the five elements (died).

O knower of dharma, assume kingship now. It is only for your sake that all this has been done by me.

﻿  My son, give up sorrow and agony and take recourse to courage. This city as well as the kingdom, free from all obstacles, is under your control.

Therefore, my son, under the guidance of Vasistha and other noble brahmins, wellversed in rituals, quickly perform the funeral obsequies in accordance with tradition and without getting depressed in spirit, get yourself coronated as lord of this earth.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे द्विसप्ततितमस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the seventysecond sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.