On hearing about the demise of the father and his two brothers sent in exile, Bharata overtaken by sorrow spoke thusः

Bereft of my father and my brother who was like a father to me, of what avail is this kingdom to me when I am grieving and fallen into misfortunes?

You have caused the death of the king and reduced Rama to an ascetic. You have piled one sorrow over sorrow on me like rubbing salt to the wound

You have come here for the destruction of this race, like a fatal night. My father did not realize that he was embracing a live charcoal.

O woman of sinful thoughts, you have brought about the death of my father. O obloquy of the race, by your folly you have deprived this family of its happiness.

My father king Dasaratha who is bound to truth and highly renowned, having come under your influence and tormented by intense grief has departed from this world.

Why was my father the righteous maharaja killed? Why was Rama exiled into the forest?

Tormented by the grief of separation from their sons, it is difficult for Kausalya and Sumitra to survive under you, O my mother.

My noble and righteous brother (Rama), who is well aware of his duties to the elders conducted himself before you as he would before his own mother.

In the same way my eldest mother the farsighted Kausalya, too adhered to righteousness and conducted herself towards you like a sister.

You have forced Kausalya's son, so pure in mind, to wear garments made of bark and dwell in the forest. Do you not feel remorse for it, O perverse wretch?

The glorious, valiant, selfpossessed (Rama) had never contemplated evil. What possible reason do you have for sending him, clothed in bark, into exile?

﻿  Being avaricious, you are, I think, unaware of my devotion to Rama. This great calamity has been brought about by you for (your greed for) the kingdom.

When Rama and Lakshmana, the best of men stay away from me, by virtue of what mighty power am I competent to protect this kingdom?

The mighty and righteous maharaja used to rely upon the powerful Rama just as mount Meru depends on the forest surrounding it for its protection.

Like a young untrained bullock that cannot carry the weight fit for a great bull, with what strength can I bear this burden?

If I gather the strength (to carry the burden) either by employing the four expedients (available to a king against an enemy) or by the power of intellect, I will not allow you, covetous of your son, to fulfil your ambition.

Had Rama not treated you as his own mother I would not have the slightest hesitation to renounce you, a lady of sinful disposition.

O woman of sinful thoughts fallen from virtuous conduct, how did you entertain this thought reproachable to our ancestors?

In our race only the eldest son is installed in the kingdom and the other brothers behave with utmost respect towards him.

O cruel one I suppose neither have you any respect for the royal tradition nor are you aware of the everlasting benefit that ensues in following the royal traditon.

﻿  According to the established law of royalty, the eldest son is invariably crowned in the kingdom. This is true of all kings. This is a special tradition of the kings of the Ikshvaku race.

As for the Ikshvaku kings, righteousness is their sole protection. They follow the ancestral traditions befitting the noble race. This tradition has been topsyturvied by admitting you into the family.

Even the kings in your ancestral family were highly distinguished men. How did this condemnable deflection originate in your mind?

O woman of sinful disposition, I on my part will not fulfil your cherished desire. You  have started a distressing deed to bring an end to my existence.

To cause a great discomfiture for you, right now I shall bring back my faultless brother, the beloved of his people, from the forest.

With the effulgent Rama brought back, I shall serve him with a steadfast mind.

Having inflicted on his mother these unpleasant words in this manner, the highsouled Bharata, overwhelmed with grief, roared again like a lion in a mountaincave.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे त्रिसप्ततितमस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the seventythird sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.