As the griefstricken Bharata was intending to proceed to Rama, Lakshmana's younger brother Satrughna said to himः

Couldn't the mighty Rama who is the ultimate refuge of all beings protect himself in his own distress? That Rama has been exiled to the forest by a woman.

And why did not Lakshmana who is strong and powerful release Rama from exile by restraining our father?

In the first place, the king could have restrained himself by reflecting on whether the course of action adopted by him under the influence of a woman was just or unjust.

While Satrughna, brother of Lakshmana was conversing thus, the hunchback Manthara decorated with all kinds of ornaments arrived at the entrance.

She had besmeared herself with the essence of sandal, had put on royal garments and  adorned herself in many ways with every kind of ornament.

Tied with colourful girdle strings and wearing many other auspicious ornaments, she  looked like a female monkey tied with a rope.

Seeing the hunchback, doer of many sinful deeds, the gatekeepers caught hold of her and informed Satrughna.

Here is that sinful, cruel woman on whose account Rama is in the forest and your father has forsaken his body. Do with her as it pleases you.

Intensely grieved to hear those words, Satrughna who was steadfast in his vows said to the inmates of the inner apartmentः

Let this woman, who caused deep sorrow to our brothers and father, reap the fruit of her malicious actions.

Saying thus, he forcibly caught hold of the hunchback amidst her companions when she filled the house with her cries.

Perceiving the enraged Satrughna all her companions shook in terror and fled in different directions.

All her companions conversed among themselves. The way he began, it looks he will finish all of us.

Let us seek refuge under the illustrious Kausalya, who is compassionate, generous, and knower of righteousness. She is our sure saviour.

With bloodshot eyes Satrughna, the scorcher of enemies, dragged the shrieking hunchback down the ground in fury.

While Manthara was being dragged by Satrughna, the collection of ornaments of many colours and of various kinds worn by her were broken and scattered here and there all over the ground.

The resplendent royal palace, strewn all over with several ornaments on the ground shone like the autumnal sky (studded with innumerable stars).

The mighty and the best of men Satrughna seized with fury, forcibly caught hold of that hunchback and censured Kaikeyi with harsh words.

Kaikeyi, deeply distressed at those harsh and grievous words was afraid of Satrughna and sought the protection of her son Bharata.

Bharata, addressing the enraged Satrughna said Of all beings a lady is not to be killed. Pardon her.

If righteous Rama were not to accuse me of slaying a mother, I would have killed the sinful Kaikeyi of wicked deeds myself.

If righteous Rama comes to know that this hunchback has been slain by us, he will certainly never talk to you or me.

Hearing the words of Bharata, Satrughna, the younger brother of Lakshmana restrained his fury and also released Manthara.

Manthara, tormented with grief, fell at the feet of Kaikeyi and began heaving deep sighs.

.  Seeing the hunchback thrown down by Satrughna and lying senseless and anguished  like a female krauncha bird caught in a net looking in different directions, Kaikeyi gently soothed her.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे अष्टसप्ततितमस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the seventyeighth sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.