The family maid (Manthara) of Kaikeyi who had been living with her since her (Kaikeyi's) birth casually ascended the palace gleaming white like the Moon.

Manthara beheld from that palace the whole of Ayodhya with its highways sprinkled with water and strewn with a lot of flowers.

The city of Ayodhya was decorated with costly banners and pennants. The labyrinthine roads were crowded with people who had (finished) their headbath and were wandering at will. The temples with their doors painted white were reverberating with the chanting from the Vedas by the best of brahmins holding garlands and sweetmeats in their hands and with sounds of all kinds of musical instruments. The city was filled with spirited horses and elephants. The bulls were  bellowing and the cows were lowing. The citizens with great joy raised the penants encircling the city of Ayodhya. All this left Manthara astonished.

Seeing a royal maid clad in white silk garment and standing not very far with her eyes expanded in delight Manthara enquiredः

Why is Rama's mother, forever interested in the accumulation of money gifting away her wealth to men with great joy?

Why do the people look exceedingly happy? Tell me, what the king with great delight is proposing to do?

Bursting with great joy, the royal maid related to the hunchback the great fortune  awaiting the son of the Raghus (Rama).

Tomorrow under the spell of the Pushya star, king Dasaratha will consecrate blameless Rama born in the race of Raghu as heirapparent (the maid said).

Having heard these words of the royal maid, the hunchback became furious and speedily descended from that palace resembling the peak of mount Kailasa.

The malevolent Manthara on fire with fury reached Kaikeyi lying upon her couch and saidः

O senseless one, why are you lying down? Get up A great fear is gripping you. Why don't you realise that you are floating in a sea of perils.

Though you appear to be your husband's darling, in reality he dislikes you. The good fortune you boast of indeed is unstable like the stream of a river in summer.

At these harsh words of the furious, evileyed hunchback Kaikeyi fell into great despondency.

Kaikeyi said to the hunchback, O Manthara isn't all well with you? I can mark it from your dejected face how greatly distressed you feel, indeed.

Hearing the words of Kaikeyi uttered in a gentle voice, wrathful Manthara skilled in speech, saidः

That hunchback feeling still more depressed in her (Kaikeyi's) interest and intending to cause in her despondency and distance Rama from her spoke outः

O queen, your end is approaching, and it has no end and it is overwhelming. King Dasaratha is crowning Rama as heirapparent.

Plunged in unfathomable fear and stricken with grief and tears I am here seeking your wellbeing and yet consumed as though by fire.

O Kaikeyi, your sorrow will augment my sorrow. Your prosperity would mean my prosperity. There is no doubt about this.

O queen, born in the royal family and being a king's consort why don't you realise the ruthless ways of statecraft?

Your husband speaks morals publicly but in private he is deceitful. He speaks gently but acts cruelly. Because of your innocent nature you are beguiled by him. You do not understand this.

When your husband approaches you he swears in meaningless, appeasing words. But today he is going to bestow benefit on Kausalya only.

That evilminded one, having sent Bharata away to your relations house, is going to install Rama unhindered in the kingdom at dawn tomorrow.

O innocent lady with the intention of doing good like a mother to your husband who is your enemy, you are holding on your lap a venomous serpent.

King Dasaratha has done to you and to your son the same thing as a snake or an  enemy would do when ignored.

O senseless lady, you are always accustomed to comfort. With deceitful words of appeasement that vicious one (King Dasaratha) is going to install Rama in the kingdom. You along with your son have been surely ruined.

O enchantingeyed Kaikeyi, that appropriate time has come. Act quickly for your own wellbeing. Save yourself, your son and me too.

Hearing the words of Manthara, Kaikeyi of charming countenance lying in her couch rose, full of joy, like the autumnal streak of the Moon's crescent.

Filled with immense joy and wonder (at the news), Kaikeyi gifted a beauthful ornament to that hunchback.

Kaikeyi, the best among the beauties, having given the ornament to Manthara, the hunchback, looked at her and said these words againः

O Manthara, the news you have brought me is exceedingly pleasant. What more can I do for you? Here is the gift for one who brings good tidings.

I do not see any distinction between Rama and Bharata as such. I am contented with Rama's consecration in the kingdom.

O woman worthy of affection for me there is nothing greater and dearer than this news. I will grant you another reward better than this. Just ask for it.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे सप्तमस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the seventh sarga of Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.