Then surveyors, experts in measurment, energetic and zealous labourers, excavators, engineers, skilled workers, architects, craftsmen, carpenters, roadlevellers, woodcutters, welldiggers, whitewashers, basketmakers, competent supervisors were sent in advance.

Then surveyors, experts in measurment, energetic and zealous labourers, excavators, engineers, skilled workers, architects, craftsmen, carpenters, roadlevellers, woodcutters, welldiggers, whitewashers, basketmakers, competent supervisors were sent in advance.

Like a swollen ocean on a fullmoon day the multitude of people proceeded joyfully with great speed to the appointed place.

Those groups who were skilled in the construction of roads took up their places with every kind of tool and departed ahead of others.

Clearing and cutting branches of various trees and creepers, shrubs, plants branchless trees and hewing boulders, the road was paved by the king's men.

Some of them, planted saplings in places where there were none, while some others severed trees here and there with axes, hatchets and sickles.

Some other stronger men, plucked the strongrooted tufts of fragrant grass. Here and there they made impassable terrains even.

Some filled wells and chasms with loose soil, while others made low level grounds plain and wide on all sides.

People threw bridges at places that needed to be bridged. They pulverised stones that obstructed the path and split open big stones to drain out water.

In a short time they constructed many water reservoirs of different shapes capable of holding large volumes of water like the sea.

In arid places, various good drinkingwaterwells surrounded by dykes were dug.

The highway for the army was paved smooth, with its surface decorated with mosaic. It was lined with blossoming trees with flocks of birds intoxicated with singing. It was decked with banners and sprinkled with sandal water and a strewn with flowers of every kind. Like the path of gods, the highway shone with brilliance.

Those authorised ordered the artisans to perform their respective tasks. Thereafter, they selected lovely tracts of land filled with trees bearing varieties of sweet fruits as restingplace for great Bharata and decorated them so splendidly, that they looked like ornaments themseleves.

Men wellversed in the study of planetary positions relating to auspicious constellations and auspicious times arranged different restingplaces at different times  during the sojourn of great Bharata.

They heaped sand and dug moats around the restingplace. It was adorned with wellbuilt highways and broad thoroughfares, lined with mansions surrounded by walls as high as mount Indrakeela. The peaks of those tall residences decorated with flags which looked as if spreading into the sky. (Thus the restingplace) shone like the abode of Indra.

The reached Ganga with its cool and limpid waters abounding in large fishes, its bank lined with groves of various trees.

The lovely royal road constructed in an orderly fashion by eminent craftsmen looked splendid like the clear sky decorated with by the Moon and clusters of stars.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे अशीतितमस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the eightieth sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.