Annoyed with Kaikeyi and filled with rage and sorrow, Manthara discarded the ornament (gifted to her) and said these wordsः

O foolish woman why do you display this misplaced happiness, little realising that you are in the midst of an ocean of sorrow?

O queen at a time when this great misfortune has befallen you, you are rejoicing  instead of feeling miserable. I am indeed laughing at you at heart.

I pity your false notion. Will any wise woman rejoice at the prosperity of the son of a cowife who is like an enemy? This is like (courting) death.

Since Bharata and Rama have equal claim to the kingdom, Bharata is a source of fear for Rama. Having thought over this matter, I am dejected. Danger springs from one who is in fear.

Lakshmana who wields a great bow has taken refuge with all his heart in Rama a  descendant of Kakutstha dynasty. So does Satrughna in Bharata.

O beautiful lady in order of birth, too, Bharata's right to the throne is just next (to Rama's). While being younger, the chances of the other two (Lakshmana and Satrughna) are remote.

Rama is learned in the duties of a kshatriya. He is wise enough to do what he should at the appropriate time. While reflecting the fate of your son, I am trembling with fear.

Kausalya whose son is going to be coronated as heirapparent by eminent  brahmins under Pushya star tomorrow is fortunate, indeed.

With folded palms like an attendant, you will have to serve that renowned Kausalya who is greatlly delighted by getting rid of her enemies.

If you thus become her attendant along with us, your son will also develop slavishness towards Rama.

All the women of Rama's (palace) will be delighted indeed. With the decline of Bharata, your daughtersinlaw will be deprived of all happiness.

Having seen that morose Manthara speaking thus, Kaikeyi commended the virtues of Rama.

Rama knows righteouness. He has been taught selfrestraint by elders. He is grateful and truthful. He is undefiled. He is the eldest son of the king. Therefore, he deserves to be the heirapparent (of the kingdom).

Blessed with a long life, Rama will protect his brothers and the servants like a  father. O hunchback, hearing Rama's coronation why are you aggrieved?

After a hundred years of Rama's rule, Bharata, the best of men, will get the kingdom of his ancestors.

Manthara, we have enjoyed prosperity in the past, we are enjoying it now and we will enjoy it in future. Then why are you aggrieved?

For me, if Bharata is worthy of consideration Rama is worthier. He serves me even more (scrupulously) than he does Kausalya.

If the kingdom is Rama's, it is also Bharata's, since Rama regards his brothers as his own self

Having heard Kaikeyi's words Manthara was extremely unhappy. Heaving deep, hot sighs she said to Kaikeyi.

You are sinking in the sea of sorrow widened with tears and troubles. But you are stupid enough not to perceive your own wellbeing.

Rama, the scion of the Raghus, will become king. After Rama, his son will suceed him. O Kaikeyi, as for Bharata, he will be debarred from royal succession (altogether).

O lovely lady, not all the sons of the king will inherit the kingdom. If all of them are installed as kings, there will be great disorder.

O Kaikeyi of beautiful limbs, for that reason kings bestow the governance of the kingdom either on the eldest or on other virtuous sons.

O (Kaikeyi) dear cut off from royal succession as well as from its comforts, your son will become totally forlorn and brokenhearted.

I am here to serve your interest. Nevertheless you do not understand me and you wish to confer gifts on me on the occasion of the prosperity of your cowife.

Rama, having secured the thornless kingdom, will banish Bharata from the country or else send him to the other world. This is certain.

Bharata has been sent by you right from his childhood to his maternal uncle's house. Proximity creates friendship even amongst the inanimate objects.

Satrughna who is obedient to Bharata has followed him. Like Lakshmana who has taken refuge in Rama, he has also resorted to Bharata.

It is said that a tree intended to be cut down by those living on the forest is let off due to entanglement of a kind of grass known as Ishika (thorny bushes) growing in its vicinity. (If Bharata had been at Ayodhya now, Dasaratha himself would have helped him.

Just as Lakshmana protects Rama, Rama protects Lakshmana. Their brotherhood is renowned in the world like that of the Ashwins.

Rama will do no harm to Lakshmana. As for Bharata, Rama will doubtless do him harm.

Therefore let your son go to the forest straight from his uncle's palace only. That alone will please me. For you also this is highly beneficial.

If Bharata secures the ancestral kingdom righteously, it will bring welfare to you and to your relations also.

Your son, that young Bharata, is accustomed to comforts. He is a born enemy of Rama. How will he, deprived of all wealth, live under the control of Rama?

Like the leader of an elephantherd attacked by a lion in the forest, Bharata is going to be oppressed by Rama. You should save him.

Being fortunate (being the favourite wife of your husband) you slighted your cowife  earlier with pride. How will she, Rama's mother (Kausalya) remain without retaliating?

O lovely lady when Rama becomes the lord of this earth with its oceans, mountains and cities, then along with Bharata you will become miserable and fall into disgrace.

When Rama obtains this earth, Bharata will be certainly ruined. Therefore, right now think of the kingdom for your son and the means of banishment for your enemy, Rama.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे अष्टमस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the eighth sarga of Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.