Bharata, the knower of righteous ways and the best among men, saw the hermitage of Bharadwaja from a distance of one krosa and brought his entire army to a halt. He laid aside all his royal robes and weapons. Clad in silk garments, he went on foot along with his ministers, with the family priest Vasistha ahead of him.

Bharata, the knower of righteous ways and the best among men, saw the hermitage of Bharadwaja from a distance of one krosa and brought his entire army to a halt. He laid aside all his royal robes and weapons. Clad in silk garments, he went on foot along with his ministers, with the family priest Vasistha ahead of him.

Then the scion of the Raghu race (Bharata) halted his ministers within sight of Bharadwaja's (hermitage) and went along following his priest Vasistha.

On seeing Vasistha, the great ascetic Bharadwaja immediately left his seat and said to his disciples, Bring offerings of water.

After meeting Vasistha and greeted by Bharata, the radiant Bharadwaja could recognize he was the son of Dasaratha.

Offering them both in order arghya (welcomeoffering), water to wash their feet and fruits in accordance with the practice, he enquired Bharata about the welfare of the family.

He enquired about the welfare of Ayodhya, of the army, treasury, friends and the ministers. But knowingly did not mention about Dasaratha's wellbeing (the knew Dasaratha was dead).

Vasistha and Bharata also enquired about his health and welfare of his sacred fires, his disciples, animals and birds and trees of the hermitage.

Saying, all is well, the great ascetic Bharadwaja, out of his affection for Rama, said to Bharataः

Why have you come here when you ought to be ruling the kingdom? Tell me everything about this. My mind is not clear in this matter.

Rama, destroyer of enemies and enhancer of the delight of his mother Kausalya, has been banished to the forest for a long time along with his wife and brother. That illustrious one has been ordered by his father to live in the forest for fourteen years through the pursuasion of a woman. To enjoy the kingdom without obstacles do you intend to cause any harm to that irreproachable Rama and his brother?

At these words, Bharata, eyes filled with tears of grief, replied to Bharadwaja in a stumbling voiceः

When one so venerable like you too misunderstands me, I am gone. There is no danger for him from me. Do not rebuke me this way.

I do not approve of whatever my mother said in my absence. I am not happy with those words and I do not accept them.

I have come to worship the feet of Rama, the best of men and persuade him to return to Ayodhya.

O venerable one in consideration of the circumstances I am in, be kind to me and tell me the whereabouts of Rama, lord of the earth.

Likewise besought by Vasistha and other priests, the venerable Bharadwaja was pleased to tell Bharataः

O best of men (Bharata) your conduct towards the preceptors, your selfrestraint and devotion to the virtuous are all in keeping with those born in the race of Raghu.

I am aware of the feelings in your heart. Even then I enquired in order to confirm it and to further your fame.

I know your brother who is conversant with righteousness is living on Chitrakuta mountain with Sita and Lakshmana.

O supremely sagacious prince gifted with the knowledge of kama (desire) and artha (wealth), tomorrow you go, but to night stay here with your ministers and fulfil my desire.

A man of liberal disposition, Bharata expressed his intention, saying, 'Be it so'. Then the prince made up him mind to spend the might in that hermitage.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे नवतितमस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the ninetieth sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.