Lakshmana, the younger brother of Rama, entered the hermitage of Agastya and met one of his disciples and said to him these words ः

The valiant eldest son of king Dasaratha has come along with his wife Sita to see the sage.

I am his younger brother Lakshmana, his wellwisher and faithful devotee if you have at all heard about me.

By the command of our father, we have entered this dense forest and desire to see the divine sire. Please report.

The ascetic heard Lakshmana, and saying, 'let it be so', entered the firesanctuary to report.

Having promptly entered, Agastya's favourite disciple with folded hands reported as he was told by Lakshmana about Rama's arrival to the great sage who was armed with the inviolable powers of penance ः

Rama and Lakshmana, the two sons of Dasaratha along with Sita, wife of Rama, have arrived at the hermitage.

Both the subduers of enemies have come here now to see and serve your Holiness. You may order what is to be done next.

Having heard from the disciple about the arrival of Rama, Lakshmana and great daughter of the king of Videha the sage said ः

It is good fortune that Rama has come here after a long time to see me. I was longing for his arrival.

Go quickly and with due hospitality conduct Rama, his wife Sita and brother Lakshmana into my presence. Why was he not ushered in so long?

'So be it ' said the disciple respectfully with folded palms in response to what the  great sage, knower of dharma, commanded.

Then the disciple in a state of excitement came out of the hermitage and said to Lakshmana, 'Where is Rama? Let him come himself to see the sage'.

Then Lakshmana reached the entrance of the hermitage with the disciple and showed Rama of the Kakutstha race and Sita, daughter of Janaka .

The disciple humbly reported Agastya's words and ushered him in with befitting hospitality.

Then Rama, Sita and Lakshmana entered the hermitage, watching herds of quietly moving deer (undisturbed by their entry).

Rama saw at the hermitage, the places (altars) of Brahma, Visnu, Agni (firegod), Indra, Sun, Moon, Bhaga, Kubera, Dhata (supreme spirit), Vidhata (creator Brahman), Vayu (Windgod), Ananta (great serpentking), Gayatri, Vasu Pasahasta, Varuna, Kartikeya and Dharma .

Rama saw at the hermitage, the places (altars) of Brahma, Visnu, Agni (firegod), Indra, Sun, Moon, Bhaga, Kubera, Dhata (supreme spirit), Vidhata (creator Brahman), Vayu (Windgod), Ananta (great serpentking), Gayatri, Vasu Pasahasta, Varuna, Kartikeya and Dharma .

Rama saw at the hermitage, the places (altars) of Brahma, Visnu, Agni (firegod), Indra, Sun, Moon, Bhaga, Kubera, Dhata (supreme spirit), Vidhata (creator Brahman), Vayu (Windgod), Ananta (great serpentking), Gayatri, Vasu Pasahasta, Varuna, Kartikeya and Dharma .

Thereafter surrounded by the disciples the sage came out. Rama saw him coming in front of the effulgent sages.

The valiant Rama said to Lakshmana, the enhancer of prosperity, O Lakshmana, sage Agastya is coming out. By virtue of his noble appearance, I know this sage to be a great treasuretrove of penances.

Having said so, the mightyarmed Rama, the scorcher of enemies, grasped the feet of Agastya who was shining like the Sun.

Then righteous Rama with Sita, the princess of Videha, and Lakshmana offered respects with folded palmsstanding.

Agastya received Rama by offering him seat and water, enquired about his wellbeing and saidः Please be seated,

After giving oblations to the fire, and providing respectful offerings, the sage worshipped the guests according to the tradition of hermits and served them food.

And then the great sage Agastya, knower of dharma first took his seat and addressed Rama, an export in the knowledge of dharma, seated with folded palms.

O scion of the Kakutstha dynasty, only after offering oblations to the Firegod, a guest should be worshipped with water etc. Otherwise the host will have to eat his own flesh in the other world like a false witness.

You are king of all the worlds, a follower of dharma, a great warrior worthy of worship and an esteemed self. O Rama you are such a dear guest come to me.

Having said this to Rama, (the sage) honoured him by offering fruits, roots, flowers and other things as desired. He then said to Rama once againः

O best among men this divine bow studded with gold and gems belongs to Visnu and designed by Visvakarma. This excellent, unfailing arrow, bright like the Sun, was given to me by Brahma.

These two quivers filled fully with sharp inexhaustible arrows, shining like flames of fire and this sword adorned with gold and this big silver sheath were given to me by Indra.

In ancient times Visnu killed the demons in a battle with this bow and brought back the glittering prosperity for the gods.

O bestower of honour, receive this bow, the two quivers, the sword and the arrow for your victory just like Indra accepts the thunderbolt.

The luminous lord Agastya, having said this, gave all the excellent weapons to Rama. And continued ः  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अरण्यकाण्डे द्वादशस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the twelfth sarga of Aranyakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.