When Khara endowed with malicious might was marching towards the hermitage, Rama and his brother saw the same omens of impending calamity the demon had seen.

When Rama saw the most dreadful, horripilating phenomena foreboding calamity, he said to Lakshmanaः

O longarmed Lakshmana see these calamitous phenomena that forebode mass destruction of men and demons.

These rumbling clouds, brownishred like the colour of a donkey, are moving about in the sky showering streams of blood.

O Lakshmana all my arrows are smoking and this goldplated bow welcomes me to war.

The way the forestbirds are screeching makes me foresee danger and makes survival doubtful.

A mass destruction of life is going to take place. There is no doubt about it. O brave Lakshmana my right shoulder trembles again and again, indicating the defeat of the enemy. Your beaming visage presages victory.

O Lakshmana, while preparing for war, those whose faces look pale are, for sure, going to die.

A dreadful roar of demons and the loud sound of wardrums beaten by the wicked demons are heard.

A wise man who apprehends danger or one who desires his own good should plan his defence even before the onset of danger.

Therefore, take shelter along with Sita in the inaccessible mountain cave, overgrown with trees, ready with your bow and arrows.

O dear, I do not like you to oppose this word of honour. You must touch my feet and  go without delay.

You are valiant and strong. There is no doubt that you can kill all these demons. But I desire to kill them.

Thus ordered by Rama, Lakshmana took the arrows and the bow and accompanied by Sita took shelter in the inaccessible cave.

With Lakshmana and Sita inside the cave, Rama heaved his shield, saying, Oh the work is accomplished.

Adorned with the shield, Rama shone like smokeless fire rising in darkness.

Valiant Rama lifted the huge bow and arrows and stood there, filling the directions with the twangs of his bow.

Then the gods along with gandharvas, siddhas, and celestial bards assembled there, wishing to witness the war.

Great ascetics of the world, distinguished brahmarsis, accomplishers of pious deeds assembled and said to one anotherः

'Let there be wellbeing for the cows, brahmins, and all the worlds. Let Rama, the scion of the Raghu race, conquer the Paulastyas (demons) in war like lord Visnu, wielder of the disc, who defeated the most powerful demons'.

Thus looking at one another they discussed among themselves how there can be war between the righteous Rama fighting singlehanded on the one hand and the fourteen thousand demons, performers of terrific deeds, on the other.

Rajarsis, siddhas, great brahmins with their clan and gods on the celestial chariots waited to see the war whetted with curiosity.

Seeing Rama standing on the war front, engrossed and radiating heroic lustre, all beings were alarmed.

Rama, who is unwearied in action and who is of an incomparable (lovely) form, looked ferocious like the wielder of Pinaka (Lord Siva).

Then appeared on all sides the wellequipped army of demons raising deep sounds with dreadful shields, weapons and banners.

The forest was filled with tumultuous sounds of the warriors roaring like lions, shouting at one another, stretching the bowstrings constantly, yawning, proclaiming loudly and beating the drums.

The ferocious animals of the forest got frightened and ran away to silent spots without looking back.

The fierce army, deep like the sea, equipped with various missiles approached Rama.

Rama, wellversed in warfare, cast his eyes on all sides to see the army of Khara that had come prepared for war.

Rama stretched the formidable bow and lifted the arrows from his quiver to kill the demons and assumed intense anger.

Rama stood burning in anger like the fire of the doom's day. It was difficult even to look at him. Seeing him full of glow even the sylvan deities ran away.

Rama in anger looked like Lord Siva ready to destroy the sacrifice of Daksha.

Seeing Rama flashing (in anger) and standing on the warfront all creatures ran away frightened.

The army of demons equipped with blazing armour, bows and banners appeared like a mass of blue clouds at Sunrise.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अरण्यकाण्डे चतुर्विंशस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the twentyfourth sarga of Aranyakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.