Having thus spoken to the demonking, the distressed Maricha said out of fear, Let both of us go.

If that warrior Rama carrying bow, arrows and sword sees me once again he will raise his weapon to kill me, and I will cease to be.

No one who exhibits his heroism before Rama will come back alive. To you, already hit by Yama's staff, he is another form of the same Yama.

What can I do if you remain evilminded? O dear demon, I am going. May your path be auspicious

Ravana was so overwhelmed with joy to hear those words that he embraced him tightly and saidः.

Act according to my wish. It befits your valour. You were a different demon earlier. Now you are Maricha.

Ascend quickly with me this chariot encrusted with gems and yoked with donkeys with devils' faces৷৷

You may go whereever you like after tempting Vaidehi. When the princess of Mithila is alone, I will bring her by force.

Thereafter Ravana and Maricha ascended the chariot, which was like an aerial car, and quickly departed from that cluster of hermitages.

And likewise, they went past towns, forests, mountains, streams, states and cities.

Ravana, king of the demons, accompanied by Maricha, then reached Dandaka forest and saw Rama's hermitage.

Then Ravana got off the chariot decorated with golden embellishments and, holding Maricha's hand, saidः.

O friend here is the site of the hermitage surrounded by banana plants. Quickly get to work on the purpose for which we have come.

Hearing Ravana's words, Maricha transformed himself into a deer and started moving at the entrance of Rama's hermitage.

Maricha assumed the form of a wonderful and magnificent deer with his antlers studded with the most precious gems, his face dappled with luminous spots of white and black.

The deer's face was like a pink lotus, his ears were like blue lotus. His neck slightly raised, his lips were like petals of blue lotus.

His bright belly was shining like kunda flowers or the Moon or diamond. His flanks were like the golden madhuka flowers. comparable to the filaments of lotus. His hooves were like vaidurya, and his legs were slim and willshaped.

His tail stood up looking magnificent like a colourful rainbow. Bedecked with various gems, he shone beautiful.

Transformed into a most beautiful deer in a moment, Maricha brightened the beautiful forest and Rama's hermitage.

Transfigured into a beautiful, magnificent form painted with the colours of different minerals in order to tempt Sita, Maricha roamed all around the grassland.

That deer with hundreds of silver spots on the body appeared enchanting and pleasing to the eyes while he wandered about nibbling the tender leaves of trees.

The deer went wandering about the banana groves surrounding Rama's hermitage and moved slowly towards the karnikara trees in order to catch the attention of Sita.

That magnificent deer glittered with the colour of blue lotus on its back, wandered merrily in the vicinity of Rama's hermitage.

The wonderful deer moved to and fro, now disappearing and now swiftly returning.

The deer is now sporting, now sitting on the ground, now standing at the entrance of  the hermitage and now running with the herds of deer.

Followed by herds of deer and coming back to see Sita again and again, the deer cavorted and pranced and frisked in circles in a wonderful way.

Seeing the deer, other animals wandering in the forest come near and sniffing him run away in all ten directions.

The demon who was interested in killing wild deer touched and felt them but did not  kill or feed on them in order to hide his intention.

In the mean time Sita who, with her auspicious looks, was busy plucking flowers drew near the trees.

With her bewitching eyes and beautiful face, Sita, went about plucking flowers from karnikara, ashoka and mango trees.

The great lady Sita, unworthy of dwelling in the forest, saw the wonderful deer decked with gems, with spots of pearls all over the body.

A lady with beautiful teeth and lips, Sita saw the deer having silver and mineral coloured hair on the body. She gazed at the animal with wonder and joy and love.

That illusory deer saw Rama's wife and moved around wonderfully as if illuminating the forest with his radiance.

Seeing such an unprecedented deer decorated with different gems, Sita, daughter of Janaka, stood amazed.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अरण्यकाण्डे द्विचत्वारिंशस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the fortysecond sarga of Aranyakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.