Sita while plucking flowers Sita who had fine hips, flawless beautiful limbs and pure golden complexion felt delighted to see the deer with gold and silver colours on both sides of his body. She called out to Rama and Lakshmana who were equipped with arms.

When Sita called Rama and Lakshmana, the two tigers among men, they looked around and saw the deer.

Seeing the deer, Lakshmana suspected him to be Maricha and said this to Rama.

Many kings, while on hunting expedition in the forest, have been deceitfully killed by malicious Maricha, who could assume any form at his free will.

O tiger among men, this deceitful demon (Maricha) has been transformed into the illusory form of a radiant deer which does not exist.

O Rama, lord of the world nowhere on earth does exist this kind of wonderful deer sparkling with gems. That it is a mere trick, an illusion there is no doubt.

Sita was too enchanted by the skin of the deer to retain her sense of discrimination. Intervening, she said to Rama joyfully with a pure smile on her faceः

O prince O longarmed one, this deer has captivated my mind. Fetch him for me.This will be our playmate.

Here at the hermitage there are many lovely deer, yaks and antelopes wandering in herds.

O longarmed one, most beautiful animals like bears, antelopes and groups of monkeys and kinneras are wandering here.

O prince this kind of beautiful, tame and glittering deer I have never seen before.

Its body glittering with different colours, speckled with gems of different kinds, is like the Moon shining and illuminating the forest.

Oh what a beauty, Oh what rich call what delightful, wonderful, graceful limbs This deer captivates my heart.

If this deer can be caught alive, it will be thrilling, it will work wonders.

After the completion of exile in the forest, when we are back in the kingdom, this deer will add beauty to the harem.

O king this deer will create amazement in Bharata, in mothersinlaw, in you and in me as well.

O best among men, if this great deer cannot be captured alive, I will wear its beautiful skin.

If this animal is killed and its golden skin is spread on a tender grass cushion, there will I like to sit.

This kind of request arising out of a woman's desire may sound terrible, still then the beauty of this animal's skin has produced in me a wonder.

By his golden colour resembling the rising Sun, by his horns with excellent gems shining like the milkyway, even Rama's mind was wonderstruck.

On hearing Sita's words and seeing the wonderful deer, Rama was tempted by its appearance.Prompted by Sita,he joyfully said this to Lakshmanaः

O Lakshmana, see the eagerness of Sita. Such a deer of exceptional beauty will not be found in this forest. There is no equal to this animal even in the Nandan garden of Indra, or the Chaitraratha, the garden of Kubera. Where can such an animal be found on earth?

The stretches of hair on the deer's body bent both in the natural order and in the opposite direction look beautiful. The spots of gold on the skin are wonderful.

Look at his tongue stretched out of the mouth while yawning. It is glowing like flaming fire. It is like the lightning sparkling in the cloud.

His face is a drinking pot of emerald, the belly is a conch or a pearl. Whose mind will not be attracted by this indescribable beauty ?

Whose mind will not be filled with wonder on seeing this divine beauty glittering like lustrous gold and studded with a variety of gems ?

O Lakshmana kings who wield bows in hunting expeditions kill deer in the forest for  sport as well as for venison.

From huge forests a variety of mineral wealth consisting of gems, stones and gold are collected with great effort.

O Lakshmana the essence of forest wealth is mineral wealth, which helps the growth of the treasury. It is conceived mentally as in the case of Venus.

A materialist moves about thoughtlessly for making money. Economists call it material wealth.



The skins of various types of deer like Priyaki, Kadali or goats or sheep cannot be compared in softness to the skin of this deer.

This majestic deer and the deer flying in heaven (the deer's figure seen in the Moon called Mrgasira) both the deer of the star in the sky and the deer of the earth are divine.

Lakshmana, as you say, if it is the illusion of a demon, even then it should be killed by me.

The great sages were tortured and killed earlier by this cruel, evilminded Maricha while wandering in the forest.

Many kings who were great archers who set out on hunting expedition were killed by him. Therefore, this animal deserves to be killed.

Earlier in this forest, Vatapi used to humiliate the ascetic brahmins and to kill them by entering into their stomach like a womb killing the female mule.

That Vatapi after a long time, once greedily entered into the stomach of the great lustrous sage Agastya and became his food.

When the venerable sage Agastya got up (after eating), he observed Vatapi wishing to turn into his real form. So smiling at him, he saidः

'O Vatapi you killed the best of brahmins living in this world, disregarding them because of your power. Hence you were digested by me.'

O Lakshmana just like Vatapi, this demon will not live. Whoever violates a person of my kind who is ever righteous and selfcontrolled will be killed

O Lakshmana, delight of the Raghu dynasty, be very alert and restrained and protect Sita. Whatever duty we have to perform depends on her protection.

O Lakshmana I will go quickly and either kill the deer or catch it. Now let me go.

See, how Vaidehi ardently longs for the skin of this deer I will not let the animal live, O Lakshmana

Keep vigil over Sita at the hermitage, O Lakshmana I will certainly kill the speckled antelope with a single arrow, get his skin and come back quickly.

O Lakshmana, be vigilant in guarding Sita, suspecting danger every moment from all directions. Take the help of Jatayu, the mighty and wise bird who will be on his rounds.  इत्याषे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अरण्यकाण्डे त्रिचत्वारिंशस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the fortythird sarga in Aranyakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.