Then Ravana in the guise of a mendicant with crooked intention to abduct her, asked Vaidehi to tell him about herself.

'He is a brahmin and also a guest. If unanswered he may curse me'. Thinking this Sita thought for a moment and saidः

O best of brahmins be pleased to know I am Sita by name, daughter of the great Janaka, king of Mithila and wife of Rama.

I lived in the house of the Ikshvakus for twelve years and enjoyed all kinds of pleasures meant for mortals.

In the thirteenth year, the king and lord Dasaratha consulted other kings and ministers to consecrate Rama.

Arrangements for consecration were on when queen Kaikeyi sought a boon from the king.

For the fulfilment of the promise made to Kaikeyi earlier by my truthful fatherin law, who, to my good luck, was the best of kings, she asked for two boons. One was banishment of my husband and second, consecration of Bharata.

'I shall not eat, or sleep or even drink if Rama is consecrated and I shall put an end to my life itself' (said Kaikeyi).

The king, my fatherinlaw, who respected her offered riches. Which she did not accept.

My husband who was very bold was twentyfive years and I had completed eighteen years since my birth.

My husband known in the world as Rama is largeeyed, longarmed, virtuous, truthful, pure and is always engaged in the welfare of all beings.

The brilliant king, Dasaratha, father of Rama, overcome by passion, did not consecrate Rama in order to please Kaikeyi.

When my husband Rama approached his father for the consecration she said these unhesitating wordsः

'O Rama, listen, your father has ordered that this kingdom be bestowed on Bharata without any obstacles.

'O Rama of the Kakutstha dynasty, you should live in the forest for fourteen years and save your father from falsehood'.

My husband Rama, a man of fearlessness and firm resolution, said to Kaikeyi 'Be it so' and carried out her words.

O brahmin this is his firm resolve and his great vowः 'One should give and never take one should speak the truth and nothing but he truth.'

Son to the second mother of Rama, his mighty halfbrother, by name, Lakshmana, a tiger among men and a slayer of enemies in battle is a companion to him.

Lakshmana, his brother, is righteous and steadfast. Bow in hand, he followed Rama along with me, into exile.

Rama who is ever righteous and selfcontrolled entered the Dandaka forest with matted locks, his brother and me.

O best of brahmins three of us have been wandering with courage in the deep forest, dislodged from the kingdom on account of Kaikeyi.

Rest here awhile. My husband will return with plenty of meat of many kinds from the forest, killing deer, alligators and wild boars.

O brahmin, tell me your name, your gotra and your pedigree. And the purpose for which you are going about all alone in this Dandaka forest

To these words of Sita, Rama's wife, Ravana, the powerful king of demons, replied sharpः

O Sita I am called Ravana, the lord of demons by whom all the worlds of demons,  snakes and gods are frightened.

O flawless beauty of golden complexion seeing you clad in silk, I am not inclined to show any interest in my own wives.

You will be the chief queen among the best of women I have won in wars. Be blessed.

My great city called Lanka is on the peak of a mountain surrounded by, and in the middle of, the sea.

O Sita, you can stroll with me in my pleasuregardens. O beautiful lady, you will not like living in the forest (thereafter).

O Sita if you become my wife, five thousand female attendants adorned with all ornaments will attend on you.

Thus addressed by Ravana, Janaki, a lady of blemishless limbs, got enraged and replied without caring for the demonः

I am devoted to Rama, my husband, who is unshakeable like a huge mountain, is comparable to lord Indra and is imperturbable like the mighty ocean.

I am the loyal wife of venerable Rama who is endowed with all excellences, a refuge to all like a spreading banyan tree, and a votary of truth.

I am the faithful wife of the longarmed, broadchested Rama, a lion among men. His gait is the gait of an advancing, invincible lion.

I am the devoted wife of great Rama, whose face is like a fullmoon, who is the son of a king, who has conquered his senses and whose fame is widespread (on earth).

You are a jackal, and you want a lioness like me who is difficult to win. I am like the Sun's radiance whom you cannot even touch.

O luckless Ravana you want the beloved wife of Rama.You will, for sure, see golden trees. (which those close to death do).

You are seeking to pull the teeth from the mouth of a hungry and powerful lion who is considered the enemy of the deer(which you are). You intend to pull the fang of a poisonous snake.

You are trying to carry the greatest of mountains, the Mandara, with one hand. You are wishing to go safe after drinking deadly poison (produced from the churning of the ocean).

You wish to violate the loving wife of Rama. You are rubbing your eyes with a needle and licking the razor with your tongue.

You want to assault Rama's dear wife. It is like girding a stone round the neck and trying to cross the sea.It is like intending to take the Sun and the Moon with both your hands.

You intend to assaut the wife of Rama, who is a lady of virtuous conduct. You wish to hold blazing fire in your cloth.

You want to acquire Rama's worthy wife. You wish to walk on sharp ironheaded spear.

The difference between you and Rama is the difference between a jackal and a lion in the forest, between a ditch and the sea, and between sour gruel and the best of wines.

The difference between you and Rama is the difference between gold and lead, sandal and slime, an elephant and a cat of the forest.

The difference between you and Dasaratha's son is the difference between a crow and Garuda, a watercrane and a peacock, a vulture and a swan in the forest.

So long Rama, equal in prowess to the thousandeyed Indra stands with bow and arrows in hand, I will not, although abducted, wither away like a diamond gulped by an insect (fly).

Having said thus to the wicked nightwalker Ravana, Sita, pure in thought remained distressed.Her slender body started trembling like a banana plant becomes shaken by a violent wind.

Beholding Sita who was trembling, Ravana, powerful like death, started telling about himself, his clan, his strength and his deeds to instil more fear in her.  इत्तयार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अरण्यकाण्डे सप्तचत्वारिंशस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the fortyseventh sarga of Aranyakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.