Rama killed Maricha, the demon assuming the form of the deer as per his will and swiftly took the return path.

While Rama was hasting to see Sita, he heard from behind the ghastly howl of a jackal.

Rama knew it was the horrible, horripilating cry of a jackal which made him apprehensive . It made him think.

'The way the jackal is howling appears ominous. May Sita be safe without being eaten up by demons

'If Lakshmana listens to Maricha imitating my voice in the form of a deer, he, sent by Sita will come for me at once, leaving her behind.

'Hence the murder of Sita must have been jointly planned by the demons. Maricha who had assumed the form of a golden deer, took me away from the hermitage to a faroff place where, killed by my arrows, he turned a demon uttering the words, Alas, Lakshmana, I am killed.

'On account of living in this dense forest in Janasthana I have earned enmity with the demons. Will Lakshmana and Sita be safe without my protection? I see many terrible portents.'

On hearing the jackal's howl, Rama began thinking how the demon in the form of a deer drew him away. Thus in the midst of apprehensions he reached Janasthana.

Dejected at heart, the birds and animals piteously kept the great soul (Rama) to the left and produced a dreadful cacophony.

On seeing such dreadfu omens at that time, Rama hurried back to his hermitage.

Rama arrived at Janasthana thinking (of the safety) of charming Sita and mighty Lakshmana.

He then saw Lakshmana coming towards him with a cheerless face. When the sad, depressed Lakshmana came near, he saw Rama (equally) despondent and griefstricken.

In this situation Rama the elder brother rebuked Lakshmana for having left Sita behind in a desolate forest infested with demons.

Rama, the delight of the Raghus, took hold of Lakshmana's left hand, and in sadness said these sweet harsh words ः

O gentle Lakshmana you are to blame for coming here, leaving Sita behind. Alas will she be safe now?

O heroic Lakshmana I see many inauspicious omens. I think Sita might have been lost or eaten away by the demons of the forest. There is no doubt about it.

O Lakshmana, a tiger among men, will we be able to see the daughter of Janaka, living in a state of total wellbeing? Will we be able to get her back ?

O mighty Lakshmana from the way the beasts, jackals and birds too have turned in the bright direction of the Sun, crying in a frightful manner, can we hope princess Sita is safe ?

Appearing in the guise of a deer, this demon allured me to a great distance. With much effort he was somehow killed. but he assumed his demoniac form while dying.

With my heart dejected and depressed, my left eye throbbing, O Lakshmana, I have no doubt that Sita is either abducted or dead or abandoned on the way.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अरण्यकाण्डे सप्तपञ्चाशस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the fiftyseventh sarga of Aranyakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.