Rama, the delight of the Raghus, once again questioned Lakshmana who had come out of the hermitage, deeply hurtः

Why did you come, leaving the princess from Mithila alone in the forest when I had left her under your trust ?

When I saw you, O Lakshmana, coming without Sita, my mind was oppressed with evil thought which have come true.

O Lakshmana, as I saw you from a distance without Sita, my left eye, my shoulder and my heart throbbed.

Thus addressed, virtuous Lakshmana, overwhelmed with sorrow replied to the grief stricken Ramaः

I did not leave her on my own nor have I come here of my own accord. I came to you,  provoked by her angry words.

Uttered loudly, 'Alas Sita, Alas, Lakshmana, save me', as if these were the words of your noble self, reached Sita's ears.

The princess from Mithila heard this cry of pain and, wild with fear, urged me out of her love for you to go.

When I was repeated asked to go, I said this in order to instil confidence in the princess from Mithila ः

'No one can cause fear in Rama. I do not see any demon who can hold a threat to him. Give up fear. Some one might have said it.

'How can Rama who is capable of saving even gods speak such unworthy, demeaning words, 'Save me, O Sita'

O fair lady, for some reason some demon has uttered these words 'Save me, save me' adapting my brother's voice.

'Lakshmana, save me' are the words uttered in an altered tone. Like an ordinary, lowborn woman you are not to feel concerned for this.

'You should not feel agitated or dispirited. Be composed. There is no one either born or going to be born in the three worlds who can defeat Rama in war. He cannot be conquered in a battle even by gods led by indra.'

Deluded by her senses, Vaidehi said these words, shedding tears when I tried to  console herः

'You have an extremely sinful intention of getting me when your brother is dead. But you will not be able to gain me.

'Since you are not reaching out to Rama who is helplessly crying for his rescue, you must have followed Rama, instructed by Bharata (to do him harm)'৷৷

'You are an enemy moving in disguise with an interest in me. You are waiting for an opportunity to set aside Rama. That is why you are not rushing to him.'

At these words from the princess of Videha, I came out of the hermitage in an agitated mood with my eyes turned red and lips quivering in anger.

To Lakshmana thus reporting, Rama, overcome with grief, said,(Even then) O noble brother your coming here, leaving her behind, is a wrong step taken.

You have come out of the hermitage provoked by Maithili's angry words, even though you are aware that I am capable of warding off the demons.

I am not happy with you as you have come here deserting Sita on the plea that she was angry and spoke harsh words.

Provoked by the words of Sita spoken in anger you came without respecting my orders. It is definitely an act of disobedience.

This demon who misled me in the guise of a deer and took me away from the hermitage, lies dead, killed by my arrow.

Bending the bow I fixed the arrow and released it at ease. Hit by that arrow he gave up his guise of the deer and assuming the form of a demon with a bracelet on his arm fell down groaning.

Hit by the arrow, the demon imitating my voice cried out in desperation which could be clearly audible even from a distance. On hearing the dreadful words you deserted Sita and came here.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अरण्यकाण्डे एकोनषष्टितमस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the fiftyninth sarga of Aranyakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.