On killing Viradha, the demon of terrific strength, heroic Rama embraced Sita, consoled her and said to his brother Lakshmana, glowing like fireः

This wild forest with which we have not been acquainted earlier is difficult to pass. (Hence) let us proceed quickly to sage Sarabhanga.

Rama went to the hermitage of Sarabhanga, a sage with divine grace who had realised the supreme (by his penance). Thus by the side of the sage he witnessed a huge wonder.

Rama saw the lord of the gods (Indra) in the sky getting off the chariot, with his body shining brightly like the sun or the fire, followed by the gods, his feet untouched by the earth. Clad in spotless attire and adorned with shining ornaments, he was being worshipped by many greatsouls like him.

Not far from that place, Rama saw a chariot, yoked with tawnycoloured horses, shining like the morning Sun. It looked like a palewhite cloud, resembling the lunar orb.

Rama saw a pure white umbrella with a highly expensive golden staff, decorated with variegated flower garlands.While near his (Indra's) head stood a pair of exquisite ladies with fans made of yak's tail.

Many celestial singers of heaven, gods, great sages and siddhas sang with the choicest words the glory of this god stationed in the sky.

While Indra was conversing with Sarabhanga, Rama saw him and said to Lakshmana.

Pointing at the chariot, Rama said, Lakshmana, see this wonderful, effulgent chariot endowed with grace is shining like the Sun in the sky.

The horses of Indra, who is often invoked (during sacrificial rituals) and about whom we have heard earlier, are now stationed in the sky.

O Lakshmana around the chariot stand hundreds of finest young men of about twentyfive years. Clad in red robes, they are wearing earrings, and holding swords in their hands. They have broad chests and stout arms like iron beams. Like tigers, they are difficult to overpower. They have necklaces hanging on their chests blazing like fire.

These tigers among men have cheerful countenacess from which it can be deduced that the age of the gods always remains constant.

Lakshmana, stay here with Sita awhile, until I ascertain who this dazzling being on the chariot is.

Instructing Lakshmana to wait , Rama went towards Sarabhanga's hermitage.

Then Indra (husband of Sachi) having seen Rama coming towards him, approached Sarabhanga and said this to him privatelyः

Here comes Rama. Before he talks to me, take me to some other place from where he may not be able to see me. He has to do a great task which is difficult for others. I can see him when he accomplishes the taste and emerges victorious.

This way honouring the sage Indra, wielder of the thunderbolt, took leave of him and went to heaven in his chariot harressed with horses.

When Indra departed like that, Rama with his retinue (Sita and Lakshmana) went to Sarabhanga who was sitting by the side of the firealtar (for Agnihotra).

Rama, Sita and Lakshmana prostrated at Sarabhanga's feet. After being permitted to sit, they were invited to stay there.

Thereafter on Rama's query Sarabhanga told him all about Indra's visitः

O Rama, Indra, the bestower of boons, wants to take me to the world of Brahma, earned by me through severe penance which is most difficult to be attained by those devoid of selfrealisation.

O Rama, the best among men you are a very dear guest to me and knowing that you are near, I will not go to the world of Brahman without seeing you.

O Rama, the best of men (only) after seeing a great, virtuous soul like you shall I go to heaven, the abode of the gods.

O tiger among men, I have conquered heavenly abodes as well as the imperishable, auspicious worlds of Brahma. Accept them all that are mine (obtained through my penance)

To these words of sage Sarabhanga Rama, the best of men, the knower of all sastras, the scion of the Raghus repliedः

O great sage, I will earn all the worlds myself if you direct me. But I need a proper dwellingplace in this forest.

To this request of Rama who was equal to Indra in strength, sagacious Sarabhanga said these wordsः

Here dwells in this forest a brilliant saint, righteous and selfcontrolled, Sutikshna by name who will look to your welfare, O Rama

You may approach sage, Sutikshna residing in a sacred spot. He will provide you a delightful place for your stay in the forest.

Proceed, O Rama in the reverse direction of the river Mandakini carrying flowers and floats. And you will reach the place.

O Rama, the best among men, this is the way. Look at me for a while, my dear, until I shed my limbs just as a snake sheds its withered slough.

Then the effulgent Sarabhanga, knower of mantras (magical spells) kindled the fire with faggots and after offering oblations of ghee plunged in.

Then were consumed that highsouled Sarabhanga's hair on the body and on the head, the wornout skin, the bones and flesh along with blood.

Sarabhanga then emerged youthful from that heap of fire, shining like a flame and looking very elegant৷৷

Sarabhanga then went beyond the worlds of the gods, of the great sages who constantly kindle sacrificial fire, and ascended to the world of Brahman.

Sarabhanga, performer of sacred deeds, saw Brahma with his followers৷৷ Brahma also seeing Sarabhanga, the best among the brahmins, welcomed him gladly.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अरण्यकाण्डे पञ्चमः सर्गः।।  Thus ends the fifth sarga of Aranyakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.