Kabandha saw the brothers, Rama and Lakshmana, stand there bound by the shackles of his arms and saidः

O bulls among the kshatriyas You are sent by destiny as food to appease my hunger. Seeing me hungry, why do you stand there with your senses switched off ?

Having heard this, Lakshmana, who was greatly suffering gathered courage at appropriate time and said these salutary wordsः

Before this vile demon gulps you and me let us cut off his long arms with our swords.

This huge, horrible demon with the strength of his arms has conquered the world, and now intends to kill us here.

O prince of the Raghu race just as the animal brought in the midst of a sacrifice should not be killed, so also for a king to kill any harmless creature is despicable.

The cruel, ferocious demon heard them talk. He opened his mouth and attempted to eat both of them.

Then the agitated brothers, aware of time and space, quickly pulled out their swords and cut off both his arms from the shoulders.

While standing on the right, Rama cut off his right arm and the brave Lakshmana cut off the left.

The strongarmed demon, his arms severed, rumbling like a raincloud filling the sky, the earth and the quarters, fell down.

The demon with his arms amputated, drenched in a pool of blood looked pathetic and asked them, Who are you?

Imbued with auspicious signs, Lakshmana revealed the identity of Rama to great Kabandha.

Here is Rama, an heir of the Ikshvaku family, known to the people and I am his younger brother Lakshmana for your information.

He is equal to a god in prowess. While living in this desolate forest his wife has been carried off by a demon. We both came here searching for her.

Who are you with only the trunk of the body, and a glittering mouth in the chest with your calf muscles broken rolling down in the forest?

While hearing Lakshmana, Kabandha, reminded of Indra's words, replied to him in great joy ः

O tigers among men you are welcome. It is my good luck that I am able to see you. It is my good luck also that the arms that bound you have been amputated.

O best among men hear how I have been deformed due to my haughtiness.  इत्यार्ष श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अरण्यकाण्डे सप्ततितमस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the seventieth sarga of Aranyakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.