The two princes set forth in the western direction towards Pampa shown by Kabandha.

Observing the trees loaded with honeysweet fruits on the mountain, Rama and Lakshmana went to see Sugriva.

Rama and Lakshmana halted on the slope of the mountain and then departed for the western bank of Pampa.

Both reached the west bank of lake Pampa and saw the delightful hermitage of Sabari.

Both reached the beautiful hermitage full of many kinds of trees. There they saw Sabari, and went towards her.

On seeing them both, Sabari, an accomplished ascetic, got up with folded hands and  touched the feet of the sagacious Rama and Lakshmana.

She offered them water to wash their feet and water to sip as per tradition. Then Rama spoke to Sabari who used to perform austere penanceः

O ascetic hope you have overcome your obstacles to penance, you have controlled your anger and your desire for food. Is your austerity in progress.

O Sweettongued Sabari, have you achieved selfcontrol? Has your mind attained peace ? Have your services to the preceptor yielded results?

When Rama asked Sabari who was an old, accomplished ascetic adored by siddhas, she stood in front and replied ः

On seeing you now my penance has attained fulfilment, my services to my preceptors have borne fruit.

O best of men, O highest of the gods my birth has become fruitful today with your worship, (you have made) even attainment of heaven quite certain.

O delight of the Raghus, your handsome look has sanctified me, O subduer of enemies, by your grace I will reach the inmperishable worlds.

The men I served have ascended heaven on aerial chariots of incomparable radiance the moment you touched Chitrakuta.

Those great honourable sages who knew the ways of dharma saidः 'Rama would visit this sacred hermitage along with Lakshmana. He would be your guest. Receive him  with due honour. And you would attain the great, inexhaustible worlds when you see him.'

O best among men I have collected and kept for your sake different kinds of forestfood grown on the bank of Pampa.

Entreated by her in that manner, the righteous Rama spoke to Sabari who was established in true knowledgeः

I have heard from great Danu about your power. If you agree, I would like to see this power in person.

At these words from the mouth of Rama, Sabari took them both round the great garden.

O delight of the Raghus see this garden looking like the dense cloud. Full of animals and birds, it is popularly known as Matanga garden.

My precepters, who had perceived the Supreme Spirit made sacrificial offerings in this great garden, invoked gods through the power of mantras. They brought water and offered oblations to the sacrificial fire.

This is the altar named Pratyaksthali where the saints aged and exhausted( by performing chandrayana) whom I worshipped made offerings of flowers with trembling hands.

O Rama see, even now they illuminate the sacrificial altars with the power of their penance. They shed light in all directions with a matchless brilliance.

Look at the seven seas, which have reached here at their mere thought as they could not reach them due to fatigue from fasting.

O delight of the Raghus look at the bark robes spread on the trees to dry after their bathing which are still wet.

The flowers including lotuses offered by the sages while worshipping gods have not yet wilted.

You have seen the entire garden and have listened what is to be heard. With your permission I would like to give up this body.

I wish to reach those realisers of the Supreme Spirit whom I served and to whom this hermitage belonged.

Rama and Lakshmana on hearing the pious words of Savari joyfully exclaimed, This is really wonderful.

Looking at Sabari who was steadfast in her vow, Rama said, O ascetic, you have worshipped me with devotion. You may go wherever you like (to the world you desire)

With matted locks, tattered bark clothes and deer skin, Sabari consigned her old and emaciated body to the fire at that moment, with the permission of Rama and ascended to heaven, her body glowing like fire.

Adorned with wonderful ornaments and beautiful garlands, anointed with fragrant unguents, robed in most beautiful clothes, she appeared like a streak of lightning, her body shining bright and her face contented.

By virtue of her selfmeditation, Sabari went to that sacred world where the holy sages lived because of their good deeds.  इत्यार्ष श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अरण्यकाण्डे चतुस्सप्ततितमस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the seventyfourth sarga of Aranyakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.