Rama, worshipped by Sutikshna and accompanied by Lakshmana, spent the night at the hermitage, and got up early in the morning.

In the morning Rama and Sita got up in time and took bath in cool, lilyfragrant water.

And as per routine, sinless Sita, Rama and Lakshmana offered prayers to the fire and other gods of the forest which was the refuge of the ascetics. Seeing the rising Sun, they worshipped him, and approaching Sutikshna, said these soothing wordsः

O revered Sutikshna received by one so worshipworthy like you, we spent the night well. We (now)take leave of you. The sages are hastening us.

We wish to see the entire circle of hermitages of the sages, residing in Dandaka forest. So we are in a hurry.

We seek your permission to go with the great sages, who are ever engaged in righteousness, selfcontrolled by virtue of their penance, and are like flameless fire.

We wish to depart before the Sun grows unbearably hot like the man devoid of good lineage who acquires wealth through unlawful means (becomes arrogant). Thereafter Rama along with Sita and Lakshmana offered worship at the feet of the venerable sage.

When both Rama and Lakshmana touched the feet of Sutikshna, the best of the sages, he lifted them up, hugged them tightly, and said affectionatelyः

You may safely tread, O Rama, this path along with Lakshmana and Sita who is following you like a shadow.

O valient Rama the sages, living in the Dandaka forest, are self realised souls. See how delightful is the location of their hermitages.

You will see the beautiful forestareas with abundant fruits and roots, flowers in full bloom, herds of animals, flocks of quiet birds tanks and lakes filled with clean waters and shining with fully blossomed lotuses, resounding with waterducks and peacocks and waterfalls coming down the hills. Thus you will enjoy a delightful sylvan sight.

O dear Rama, O Lakshmana you may leave (now), you may have to come back to this hermitage after seeing those places.

Thus addressed, Rama, scion of the Kakutsthas along with Lakshmana circumambulated the sage (in reverence) and set forth.

Thereafter largeeyed Sita handed the brothers two quivers, two bows as well as two excellent swords.

Both Rama and Lakshmana tied their auspicious quivers, took the two twanging bows and departed from the hermitage.

Handsome Rama and Lakshmana, glowing in their radiance held the bows and exited with Sita.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अरण्यकाण्डे अष्टमस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the eighth sarga of Aranyakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic  composed by sage Valmiki.