'I sought to appease my brother who arrived in an agitated state overpowered with anger.

'By providence you have come back safe and the enemy has been killed. You are the only protector to an orphan which I am.

'Here is the manyribbed parasol shining like the full Moon above the horizon and the yak's tailfan held by me.Pray accept it.

'O king I waited at the entrance of the cave for a year. As you did not come out, I felt distressed and my heart sank in great sorrow seeing blood flowing out of the cave. With my senses fused I returned to Kishkinda, closing the entrance with a rock(lest the demon should come out).

'Here I was consecrated by the people and ministers who saw me immersed in grief. It was not my desire to be coronated. Therefore, I may be forgiven.

'You alone are the king and worthy of reverence.I will be the same old brother carrying out my work as earlier. I held the responsibility of the state in your absence forced by the citizens and ministers. The kingdom has been kept stable with the enemies destroyed.

'I am handing over this kingdom which was in trust. O slayer of enemies, O good natured one, give up your anger against me.

'O king I bow my head and beg you with folded hands. The ministers and citizens assembled and forced me to take charge, as the kingdom without a ruler was vulnerable to attack.'

'Even tnough I spoke to him with affection, Vali abused me in many words, saying, 'Fie on you'.

'Having invited ordinary people and favourite ministers he condemned me in the presence of friends.

'You know very well how that wicked demon, Mayabi, that night challenged me angrily to a duel.

'On hearing his words I came out of the royal abode quickly, followed by this wicked brother.

'The powerful demon that night saw me followed by another advancing towards him and fled out of fear. When we chased him, he entered this huge cave in great speed.

'When I saw the dreadful demon entering the great cave, I instructed this cruel brother of mineः

'I cannot return from here without killing him. Wait at the entrance of the cave until I kill him. Look forward to my return.

'Presuming that Sugriva was waiting there, I entered the formidable cave. While I was searching for the demon there, one year passed.

'I could find that fearful enemy there and killed him along with his relatives without any difficulty.





'When there was no response from Sugriva to my repeated call in distress I was very  sad.

'I kicked the boulder again and again till it yielded. I came out that way and arrived at the city.

'I was obstructed by wicked Sugriva who forgot his brotherly love and was desiring the kingdom, which belongs to me.'

'When Vali, the monkey, spoke that way I remained unperturbed. He banished me with the only cloth I was wearing.

'O Rama my wife has been usurped. There is the fear of his attack. So I am roaming this entire earth, covered with forests and oceans.

'Tormented by the abduction of my wife by Vali, I came to the great Rishyamuka mountain inaccessible to Vali for some other reason.

'O Rama I have given you this long, full account of the cause of our enmity. For no fault of mine I am suffering.

'O great warrior you are one who can frighten the entire world Due to the fear of Vali I seek your grace.You may resist Vali and provide me security.'

Having thus addressed by Sugriva the righteous and glorious Rama with a gentle smile consistent with righteousness, started speakingः

'These my sharp, unfailing arrows, bright as the Sun, released by me out of anger will descend on the evildoer, Vali.

'That sinful Vali who has abducted your wife and violated the moral code will live only as long I do not see him.

'Inferring from my own experience, I see that you are immersed in an ocean of sorrow.I will help you cross over and fulfil your desire.'

On hearing his words that boosted his joy and vigour, Sugriva was immensely pleased and said these warm words.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे दशमस्सर्गः  Thus ends the tenth sarga of Kishkindhakanda of the Holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.