Having heard Sugriva's pleasing words, the brilliant Rama took up the bow in order to inspire confidence in Sugriva.

Rama, subduer of the enemy's pride, strung his terrific bow, produced the twang that filled all directions, and discharged a single arrow aimed at the sala tree.

Released with great force, Rama's arrow embellished with gold pierced through the seven sala trees and splitting the mountain terrain entered the earth.

In a moment the arrow emerged from the earth which it pierced and reentered the quiver with great speed.

The chief of the monkeys was struck with wonder seeing Rama's arrow piercing through the seven sala trees so swiftly.

Sugriva was immensely happy and offered obeisance to Rama with folded hands and bowed down and prostrated while his ornaments touched the ground.

Sugriva who stood by, elated to watch the deed of Rama, best among the valiant, proficient in the use of arms of all kinds and knower of dharma, saidः

'O bull among men, O lord, you are capable of killing with your arrows even the gods including Indra in the battle, what to speak of Vali.

'O Rama who can in a battle confront you, capable of splitting seven huge sala trees, the mountain and the earth with a single arrow?

'Having found a friend in you comparable to Indra and Varuna, my grief is gone and I am so happy now.

'O Rama, for my pleasure kill Vali who is, to me, an enemy in the guise of a brother. I fold my hands to you.

Then wise Rama embraced handsome Sugriva and replied in these words which were agreeable to Lakshmanaः

'O Sugriva, get ready at once. We will promptly proceed to Kishkinda from here. Go ahead and challenge Vali, your brother only in name, to a combat.'

Thay all rushed to Kishkinda, the capital of Vali and waited in the thick forest behind the trees.

Sugriva tightened up his waist cloth hurriedly and roared terrifically as though piercing the sky. And screamed for Vali.

On hearing his brother roaring, powerful Vali was enraged and rushed like the Sun from behind the western shore of the ocean (this simile suggests the downfall of Vali).

Then a tumultuous combat took place between Vali and Sugriva who looked like the planets Mercury and Mars.

The brothers, insensate with fury, struck each other like thunder with their palms, soles and fists in the combat.

Bow in hand, Rama watched both the heroes who resembled the twin Aswini Kumaras.

Since Rama was not able to distinguish between Vali and Sugriva, he could not decide whether he should discharge his deadly arrow .

Discomfited by Vali, and not seeing Rama around, Sugriva ran towards Rishyamuka mountain.

Exhausted, disfigured and body mauled and drenched in blood all over, Sugriva, chased by the infuriated Vali, entered the region of great sage Matanga.

Effulgent Vali saw Sugriva entering the (prohibited) grove and turned back due to the fear of the curse (of sage Matanga) saying, 'You have escaped'.

Rama together with Lakshmana and Hanuman also arrived at the same gave where Sugriva was.

At the sight of Rama accompanied by Lakshmana, Sugriva felt ashmed and aggrieved, and looking down on the ground, saidः

'You demonstrated your prowess and directed me to challenge Vali and then why did you make the enemy hit me thus?

'Had you, in fact, told me that you were not going to kill Vali, I would not have budged from this place.'

On hearing the great Sugriva's miserable and moving words, Rama again saidः

'O dear Sugriva dispel your anger and listen to me why I had not released the arrow.

'O Sugriva in form, ornaments and movements there is perfect resemblance between you and Vali.

'O monkey in your voice, in brightness, in looks, in valour or in words I have marked no difference between you.

'O distinguished monkey you both are so similar in form that I was puzzled and did not release my swift arrow that could have destroyed the enemy.

'I was doubtful because of your similar appearance. I thought that I should not strike at the very root of the interests of both of us. Therefore, I did not release the terrific and deadly arrow.

'O lord of monkeys I would have betrayed my foolishness and childishness had I exposed you to danger by my ignorance and thoughtlessness.

'It is said that killing a person to whom protection is promised is highly sinful. Lakshmana, darling Sita and me, are under your care and you are our refuge.

'Therefore, O monkey, go and engage yourself in fight again. Do not suspect me. With this single arrow of mine, in one moment you will see Vali thrown down and rolling on the ground in this combat.

'O lord of monkeys while you both are engaged in a duel wear some identification mark by which I can recognise you.

'O Lakshmana this Gajapushpi in bloom is auspicious. Pluck and fasten it on great Sugriva's neck.'

Then Lakshmana went to the mountain slope, plucked the (creeper with) gajapuspi blossoms and fastened it on the neck of Sugriva.

With the creeper round the neck, Sugriva looked like the raincloud at twilight, adorned by a row of cranes like a garland.

Radiant Sugriva intent on carrying out Rama's words again went to Kishkinda ruled by Vali.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे द्वादशस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the twelfth sarga of Kishkindakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.