They all at once went to Kishkinda ruled by Vali and there waited hiding behind the trees in the dense forest.

Broadnecked Sugriva, a lover of the forest, looked around and flew into a rage.

Sugriva, surrounded by his companions, raised his voice as if piercing the sky, roaring like a huge thundering cloud, challenging Vali to a duel.

Sugriva, proficient in the performance of any task, one who appeared like the rising Sun and moved like a proud lion, said to Ramaः

'We have arrived at Kishkinda, the capital of Vali, decorated with flags and having a glittering golden archway that can be opened mechanically. Teeming with monkeys, it looks like a snare to catch the enemy.

'O heroic Rama fulfil quickly the vow taken by you earlier to kill Vali in the same way a creeper bears fruit when the time comes.'

Requested thus by Sugriva, righteous Rama, the destroyer of enemies, repliedः.

'Lakshmana has uprooted a creeper of gaja, and fastened it on your neck by which you can be easily identified.

'O hero, you are shining with the creeper fastened to your neck , just as the fullmoon adorned with a cluster of stars shines in the sky.

'O monkey, with the release of a single arrow in the combat, I shall dispel your fear and enmity (hatred) for Vali.

'O Sugriva show me your enemy,who is in the guise of your brother.He will be killed. He will roll down in the dust of the forest.

'If Vali appears before me I will not let him go with life.Then you will not blame me and find fault with me.

'You have seen how I have pierced through seven sala trees with a single arrow. You will know how with the same strength I will kill Vali.'

'O Sugriva, I have uttered no falsehood before for fear of deviation from righteousness although I was in distress, nor shall I utter any falsehood in any circumstances hereafter.

'I shall fulfil my promise just as Indra (who performed a hundred sacrifices) helps production in the cornfield through timely rain. Give up your apprehension.

'O Sugriva give a warcry so that Vali adorned with a golden garland will come out.

'Vali, who is proud of his valour, is strong, fearless and fond of combat, will rush out of the city in response to your challenge.

'Proud of their own prowess, heroes will not brook the challenge of foes in battle, specially in the presence of women.'

On hearing Rama's words, the goldenhued Sugriva roared in a fierce voice as if it would piece the sky.

Alarmed at the yelling of Sugriva, the cows began to run in all directions, like the women of noble pedigree who, with their brightness lost, run perplexed for failure of the king to protect their chastity.

The deer were unable to run like wounded horses in a battle. Birds fell down on the ground like planets fall when their merit is exhausted.

Then Sugriva, son of the Sungod, with his lustre enhanced by his valour moved swiftly. His roar resembled the rumbling of a cluster of thundering clouds. He gave a warcry the tone of which resembled the sounds of waves lashed by high velocity winds in the sea.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे चतुर्दशस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the fourteenth sarga of Kishkindakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.