The indignant Vali, who was in the harem, heard the roaring of his venerable brother, Sugriva.

The roar (of Sugriva) that frightened all beings gave Vali's vanity a jolt and at once aroused in him violent rage.

Overcome with anger, Vali looked pale like the eclipsed Sun with the golden radiance faded from his face.

Vali, who looked fierce with his teeth and whose eyes shone like a flaming fire through anger looked like a pond with the lotuses and their stalks uprooted.

Unable to tolerate Sugriva's roar, Vali stepped out hurriedly, taking long strides as if breaking the earth.

Tara, perplexed out of fear, glanced at Vali lovingly, embraced him and gave him wise counselः

'O valiant Vali anger has overtaken you like the flood of a river. It is natural for you to be angry at this time, but shake off your anger just as the wise discard a flower garland already used up.

'O monkey fight him only tomorrow morning. By this you are not going to prove your weakness or increase your respect for the enemy.

'I do not like your rashness. I will explain the reason I am preventing you. Listenः

'Earlier, he (Sugriva) came and challenged you to a duel. You struck him in anger, and defeated, he fled, running in all directions. Now his challenge rouses my suspicion.

'One who is defeated and badly mauled by you is again coming and inviting you to a duel in this manner arouses suspicion in me.

'His determination, his insolence, his roaring, his arroganceall this cannot be for a small reason.

'Certainly Sugriva has not come here to give a warcry without any external help. The  person whose refuge he has sought is not a small one.

'Sugriva is clever by nature. He is wise. Without assessing the ability of the ally he will not enter into friendship.

'O hero I have heard the news earlier from our son Angada. I will tell you what he had heard and what he has said to meः

'When our son Angada was out into the forest he had collected some reports from the spies which he has transmitted to me.

'Rama and Lakshmana, two heroic sons of the king of Ayodhya born of the Ikshvaku race, are invincible in war. They have come there to help Sugriva.

'Rama, famous for crushing foes in war, like the fire that breaks out at the dissolution of the world, has slain strong enemies like Khara and will help your brother.

'He is like a sheltering tree to the virtuous, an ultimate refuge for the destitutes and a protector of the distressed. He is the sole repository of fame.

'He is endowed with the knowledge of science and scriptures. He stood by his father's command. He is like a mine of virtues just as the lord of the mountain is a mine of minerals.

'Rama is immeasurable in prowess and unconquerable in war. Therefore, enmity with him is not desirable for you.

'O hero, this I tell you not because I dislike you, but because I wish your welfare. Listen, and do as I say

'O king O hero consecrate your brother Sugriva as prince at once. Do not create enmity with him.

'Leave enmity with Sugriva far behind. Make friendship with Rama. I think it is the right thing for you.

'This monkey is your younger brother and, therefore, deserves your protection. Whether he is here or there, he is your brother.

'Indeed I do not see any of your relatives comparable to him on earth. Give up enmity with him. Give him wealth. Give him respect. Keep him by your side.

'Extend your brotherly affection to broadnecked Sugriva. He is always your great relation. There is no alternative for you other than this at present.

'Pray, do me this favour. Treat me as your wellwisher. Heed my advice given with care.

'Do not lose your temper. Quieten your mind. My advice is beneficial to you. You should not fight with the prince of Kosala who is comparable to Indra in splendour.It is not proper for you.'

Even though Tara gave good counsel to Vali at the hour of destruction, the advice did not find favour with him as he was under the influence of unfavourable time (seized by death).  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे पञ्चदशस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the fifteenth sarga of Kishkindakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.