To these words of Tara with her Moonlike face, Vali replied reproachfullyः

'O lady with a charming face why should I tolerate the enemy (Sugriva) who is none other than my own younger brother, especially when he roars excitedly?

O timid lady to swallow insult (without facing the opponent) is worse than death for  indomitable heroes (like me) who know no retreat in a battle.

'When the weaknecked Sugriva roars eager to join a duel it is not right on my part to tolerate his arrogance,much less his warcry.

'You need not be concerned about me on account of Rama. How can one who knows dharma and who has a sense of gratitude commit sin?

'Go back with all the women of the harem. Why do you follow me again? Your devotion towards me is evident from the sincere concern expressed by you.

'I shall accept the challenge and fight with Sugriva. Give up your anxiety. I will destroy his pride, not his life.

'When he faces me in the battlefield, I will hit him with trees and fists, and he will run back for life.

'That evilminded Sugriva cannot bear my mighty, hard blows. Tara you could shower your affection on me and extend help (in passing secret information obtained through Angada)

'I make a vow even on my life and my victory. Pray return with the retinue. I will be back only after winning the encounter with my brother.

Pleasing in her words, Tara then embraced Vali and sobbing, circumambulated Vali in compliance (to his advice).

The wise counsellor, Tara bade him farewell, wishing him victory and then, overwhelmed with sorrow, entered the inner apartment followed by the womenfolk.

After Tara and other women returned to their abode, Vali departed from the city, hissing like a huge angry cobra.

The mighty Vali, breathing heavily, looked around to find where his enemy was.

There Vali saw Sugriva in lustrous, red gold complexion standing ready for a combat steady like glowing fire.

On seeing the great hero Sugriva standing firmly, the enraged Vali tied his upper cloth (around his loin) tightly.

Vali tied up his cloth tightly, raised his fist and advanced towards Sugriva, ready for the encounter.

Sugriva also lifted his fist firmly and advanced more impatiently towards Vali adorned with a golden necklace.

While Sugriva, expert in combat, advanced swiftly to pounce upon (his enemy), Vali whose eyes turned red in anger saidः



This infuriated Sugriva who, looking at Vali, said 'This fist of mine will draw your life out, hitting your forehead'.

Struck by Vali, enraged Sugriva encountered Vali more aggresively. His body drenched in blood seemed a mountain with rivulets of blood flowing.

With all his vigour, Sugriva uprooted a sala tree, pulled it out and struck Vali on the body, like a thunderbolt striking a huge mountain.

Struck by the blows of the sala tree, Vali also lost his balance like the heavily loaded ship of a trader shaken up in the ocean.

Both of them endowed with terrible strength, fierce in appearance, and each seeking the weak points of the other advanced, as fast as Garuda, striking at the enemy. Their fight grew more and more fierce like the fight between Sun and Moon in the sky.

In a short while Vali, endowed with great strength, gained the upper hand and Sugriva, son of the Sungod, was losing ground .

With his strength waning and pride crushed, Sugriva, anguished, exhibited shrewdness.

Both like Vritra and Indra fought, hitting each other again and again with trees full of branches and tops, with their hard nails akin to thunderbolts and with their fists, knees, feet, etc.

The monkeys, wanderers in the forest, both with blood stains fiercely clashed pointing at each other, roaring with dreadful sounds like two clouds.

Raghava perceived that the monkey king Sugriva whose strength was waning was looking again and again in all directions (seeking help).

Finding the king of the monkeys in distress, the heroic, brilliant Rama looked for an arrow in order to kill Vali.

Rama then fixed an arrow which resembled a venomous snake, on to his bow looking like the very deathwheel of Yama and stretched it fully.

As if scared by the twang of the bowstring, winged and feathered birds and animals ran frightened in different directions.

As Rama shot the mighty arrow, it went like a blazing lightning with a thunderous sound and pierced into the chest of Vali.

Then the powerful monkey king Vali, who was proud of his might, fell down on earth, struck by the fast flying arrow.

Vali fell lustreless on the ground. He was thrown down unconscious like the banner (hoisted in honour) of Indra on the fullmoon day of Aswayuja month.

The arrow of Rama, distinguished among men, adorned with silver and gold, which could crush the enemy shone like fire and smoke emitted from the mouth of Rudra at the time of dissolution (at the end of the aeon).

While Indra's son (Vali) fell unconscious on the ground, drenched in blood flowing, like a fully bloomed Asoka tree shaken down by the wind, he looked like Indra's flag fallen.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे षोडशस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the sixteenth sarga of Kishkindakanda of the Holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.