Arriving with Laksmana at the lake filled with lotuses, lilies and fishes, Rama, his senses oppressed, burst into tears.

He was glad to see it but sad at the thought of Sita. His passion stirred, his senses shaken, he said this to Saumitriः

'O Saumitri Pampa looks beautiful with its water clear as vaidurya, its lilies and lotuses in full bloom and its trees in all their variety.

'O Saumitri look at the pleasant forest around Pampa where trees stand splendid like mountainpeaks.

Already saddened due to the abduction of Sita and plight of Bharata, I am tormented by Spring.

Though stricken with grief, I feel so delighted to see the auspicious Pampa with its wonderful forest and cool water scattered with flowers.

Abounding in lotuses, birds and beasts and vicious serpents moving about, it looks splendid indeed.

The bluishyellow grass, dotted with different kinds of flowers fallen from the trees shines like a carpet spread.

Entwined with flowering creepers the treetops are covered all over with rich loads of flowers.

'O Saumitri it is the season of spring. The trees are laden with fruits and fragrant flowers. Ecstatic blows the gentle freeze.

'Look at the flowering trees sending showers of flowers like water dropping from the clouds, O Saumitri

Various forest trees shaken by the force of the wind scatter flowers on the beautiful rocky surface of earth.

O Saumitri! look, the breeze appears to be playing with the flowers; that are fallen and that are still on the trees.

"As the wind shakes the flowers off the branches of various trees the bees bumble in tune with the (whistling) wind.

"As if the trees are dancing to the music of the cuckoos and to the sound of the wind coming out of the mountain-caves.

"Shaken by the strong wind all over, the tops of trees look as if they are knitted together.

'The gentle touch of the breeze that blows, cool like sandalwood, full of pure fragrance, takes away the fatigue of the body.

As if the trees are singing, swayed by the wind, while the bees in the forest, fragrant with honey, hum in tune.

'The huge trees in the scenic mountainranges look delightful with their blossoms touching the peaks.

With the tops of trees covered with flowers, the black bees hovering (humming) over them, the trees, shaken by the restless wind look like singers. (The trees with the top decked with flowers, the bees like black hair on the head swaying in the wind look like dancing and singing)

'See these Karnikaras in full bloom all over, looking like people clad in yellow silk adorned with golden ornaments.

'O Saumitri this spring season resonating with the sounds of several kinds of birds, kindles my anguish as I am separated from Sita.

'Kandarpa (Cupid) torments me while I am already griefstricken. The Cuckoo with his challenging cheerfulness mocks me.

'Lakshmana, while I am already lovestricken, the swamphen (gallinule, a marshbird) troubles me with its joyous cackles in the beautiful foreststream.

'While in the hermitage in the past, my beloved was very glad to hear such sounds, invite me to join her and rejoice again.

'See, the different kinds of birds flying towards trees, shrubs and vines making wonderful sounds all over.

'O Lakshmana the female birds praised by their flocks, are united with their male partners. Enjoying the sweet sounds of large black bees, they are singing melodiously.

These trees seem to enkindle my passion through all sorts of sounds like the loud cackle of swamphens and the sweet warble of the male cuckoos.

'The fire of spring with clusters of Asoka flowers as its charcoal, its coppercoloured tender leaves as flames, the buzz of bees as its crackle will, as if, consume me.

'O Saumitri my life is meaningless if I cannot see my beloved Sita with her delicate eyelashes, beautiful locks of hair and her sweet voice.

'O sinless one, the spring season is dear to my beloved Sita when the outskirts of the forest are filled with voices of the cockoo.

'The fire of grief ignited by Kandarpa (the god of love), enhanced by the effects of spring will certainly consume me soon.

'Unable to see my beloved wife, the very sight of these lovely trees intensifies my love for her who shines resplendent in me.

'When in place of Vaidehi I see spring (with its cool breeze) that used to take away the sweat generated by sensual enjoyment, my sorrow is intensified.

'O Saumitri the cruel breeze of the spring forest torments me as I am now immersed in grief in the absence of my fawneyed beloved.

'Delightful are the peacocks dancing here and there, their feathers looking like crystal windows flung open by the wind.

'The peacocks intoxicated with passion for the peahens surround them intensifying my longing (for Vaidehi).

'Look at the lovelorn peahen, excited by love, dancing on the moutain slope, O Lakshmana Engrossed in love, she dances for wooing the peacock.

'Overwhelmed with love, the enchanted peacock, spreading his wings is running after her, making sounds, as though mocking her.

'The peacock's beloved, for sure, has not been abducted by the demon. Therefore, he is dancing in delight in the forest in the company of his beloved.

'It is extremely unbearable for me to stay in the forest during this season of flowers (Spring). Look at the passion even among beasts and birds, O Lakshmana And craving for love, the peahen sports near her mate.

'Had the largeeyed Janaki not been stolen, she would have also paid advances to me in this manner with all her love and excitement.



'The trees look enchanting with flowers in full bloom, with bees hovering over them. But the flowers fruitlessly drop down on the ground.



'If spring reigns wherever my beloved Sita is, she must have been overwhelmed with similar sad feelings like me.

'Spring must not have touched the place where she is now staying. Otherwise how could my Sita with eyes like blue lotus live without me?

'Or, if there is spring where my beloved lives, what can that lady of beautiful hips do, threatened by enemies.

'Eager to speak with her gentle voice, my young beloved, blessed with eyes like lotus petals, will certainly give up her life, unable to enjoy the spring.

'My mind makes me feel certain that Sita with her chastity might not be able to live  separated from me.

'Sita has her love truly fixed in me. My love for her is equally steadfast.

'This cool breeze that carries the fragrance of flowers, that is gentle in its touch feels like fire when I think about my beautiful beloved.

'The pleasant touch of the wind, which made me happy in the company of Sita intensifies my grief now in her absence.

'The crow that cried unhappily flying in the sky as if to foretell my separation from Sita, is now on the tree, singing joyfully (suggesting my possible union with Sita).

'The same crow attendant on Vaidehi there will take me to my largeeyed beloved.

'Losten, O Lakshmana to the sweet warblings of the birds on the blossoming treetops of the forest. My love for her (Sita) enhances with their sweet voices.

'This honeybee is eager to approach the bunch of tilaka flowers in bloom scattered by the wind like a lover advancing towards his passionate beloved.

'This asoka tree increases (by nature) the sorrow of lovers. Perhaps it make its presence felt in order to intimidate me with the clusters of its flowers scattered by the wind.

'O Lakshmana these mangotrees full of blossoms appear like sexited men who have applied fragrant unguents to their bodies.

'O Saumitri O' tiger among men look at the kinnaras wandering here and there, in the wonderful forest around the Pampa lake.

'O Lakshmana look at these lotuses with fine fragrance all over the water glowing like the rising Sun.

'This Pampa with its water clear and fragrant with red and blue lotuses is filled with swans and geese.

'Lake Pampa shines with lotuses with bees on their filaments like the rising sun.

'Frequented by the Chakravakas and surrounded by the wonderful forest with thirsty elephants and deer this Pampa looks beautiful.

'O Lakshmana look at the lotuses in clear water dashing against one another due to waves caused by the force of the wind.

'Unable to see my beloved with eyes large like totus petals and an ardent lover of lotuses, I have no desire to live.

'Oh how adversly disposed is the god of love He makes me remember that auspicious lady with a pleasing voice when she is lost and difficult to reach.

'If the spring that has set in, with the trees in bloom does not kill me, I have once again to endure the agony of love.

'Whatever was endearing to me earlier in the company of Sita, has turned out to be disenchanting without her.

'Seeing the delicate petals around the lotus buds that look like beautiful eyelids of Sita, my eyes crave for them O Lakshmana

'The bleeze that blows through the trees carrying the fragrance of the filaments of lotuses feels pleasant like Sita's breath.

'Look at the very spectacular karnikara tree with its blossmed branches on the mountain slope towards the southern side of Pampa, O Saumitri

'This king of mountains is rich with plenty of minerals and, therefore, generates  multicoloured dust particles splattered by the speed of the wind.

'O Saumitri With leafless kimsuka trees in full bloom all over the mountain ranges they appear beautiful like blazing mountains.

'Very closely grown on the banks of Pampa, stand malati, mallika and karavira trees with their clusters of fragrant blossoms.

'Fully blossmed ketaka, sinduvara, madhavi and kunda bushes in spring scatter their fragrance everywhere.

'Chiribilva, madhuka, vanjula, bakula, champaka, tilaka and naga varana and kharjura trees are in full bloom.

'Lotuses and blue asokas are also in bloom. Lodhra trees on the mountainslopes look golden like the lion's mane.

'There are trees like ankola, kuranta, churnaka, paribhadraka, mango, patali, kovidara, muchukunda, arjuna, ketaka, uddalaka, shirisha, shimshupa and shava, all in full bloom on the mountain peaks.



'O Saumitri look at the beauty of these numerous flowering trees on the banks of Pampa, entwining creepers with blooming tops.

'While the branches of trees swayed by the wind draw close, the creepers follow the trees like lovely women in a drunken state.

'The wind blows from tree to tree, mountain to mountain, and forest to forest as though content to enjoy all the fragrance.

'Some trees stood fragrant with profuse flowers and some with buds shining blue.

'Fascinated by the flowers, the honeybees cling to one or the other, humming, 'this is soft, this is sweet, and this is fullyblossomed.'

'The bees greedy for honey move among the trees on the banks of Pampa. Resting for a while, at one place they fly soon to another.

'With countless flowers fallen on their own from trees and scattered like a bed of flowers on stone the ground is rendered comfortable enough to relax on.

'O Saumitri varieties of colourful flowers, some red and some yellow, are spread out on the mountain slopes.

'Winter has ended and the season of flowers has set in, O Saumitri The trees are full of flowers as if competing with one another.

'The trees, crowned with flowers filled with humming bees, look splendid. It appears they are calling one another, O Lakshmana

'This duck, entering into auspicious water, sports with its beloved and incites my love.

'Only Ganga, like Pampa, has such captivating charm. Its beauty and virtues are famous in the world.

'O Lakshmna, the best of the Raghu race, if only that chaste Sita appears, we will stay here. I will not wish for the position of Indra or for Ayodhya.

'If I can sport with Sita in this beautiful green grassy land, I will not have any worry, I would not desire for any other pleasure.

'These trees with their beautiful leaves and varieties of flowers bring me agony as I live in this forest separated from my beloved.

'O Saumitri look at this lake of cool water filled with, lotuses, chakravakas flying about and ducks floating.

Pampa, filled with swimming, kraunchas and frequented by big animals looks splendid. The joyous warbling of a variety of birds is highly exciting. They kindle my passion for my young, Moonfaced, lotus eyed beloved.

Look at the (male) deer happily roaming here and there together with the female deer on the colourful mountain slopes. Separated from the fawneyed Vaidehi, this sight fills my heart with agony.

'If I find my dear beloved here on these mountain slopes full of passionate birds how happy will I not feel

'O Saumitri I can be alive and happy if Sita of slender waist enjoys here with me the sweet breeze of Pampa.

'O Lakshmana blessed are those who enjoy the breeze filled with fragrance of lotuses of the surrounding forests of Pampa. The gentle and auspicious breeze indeed takes away the sorrow of the mind.

'How can Janaka's daughter with eyes like lotus petals, so young and loving, sustain her life? Away from me, she must be feeling quite dejected.

'If righteous and truthful Janaka enquires about Sita's wellbeing in the assembly of people, what am I to speak ?



'She followed me, O Lakshmana as I was deposed from the kingdom and distraught. Now helpless, how can I live without her?

'Unable to see her beautiful, face with auspicious eyes like fragrant lotuses, I feel (so) depressed.

'When can I listen to Sita's sweet, wholesome and virtuous, incomparable words interlaced with her gentle smile, O Lakshmana?

My young and faithful beloved used to put up a brave face and speak to me in all propriety to cheer me up in the midst of suffering in the forest whenever I felt tormented by passion.

'O Prince, what can I tell the highminded Kausalya at Ayodhya when she asks the whereabouts of her daughterinlaw'?

'You may go to Ayodhya, O Lakshmana, to see our loving brother, Bharata. It is not possible for me to survive without the daughter of Janaka'.

Thus spoke Lakshmana these befitting, unforgettable words to his hissouled brother, Rama wailing like an orphanः

'O Rama, the foremost of men, control yourself. Be blessed. People who are pure at heart do not feel depressed at heart.

'Remembrance of loved ones causes sorrow. Even a wet cotton wick gets burnt by embracing excessive oil. Hence abandon grief.

'Even if Ravana escapes into the nether world or into a world still lower, he cannot save himself by any means, O Rama

'Once the whereabouts of that sinful demon are known he will either deliver Sita or die.

'Even if Ravana enters into the womb of Diti (mother of demons) along with Sita, I will  slay him there if he does not return the daughter of Mithila.

'O noble prince be blessed. maintain composure. Without making any effort it is not possible to achieve the objective and recoup loss.

'O revered Sire, enterprise is supreme strength. Nothing is difficult in this world for one who is up and doing.

'Enterprising men will never be disappointed in their mission. It is possible to get Sita through effort alone.

'Bardon grief. Give up emotion. You are a great soul. You are not aware of your great accomplishments. (The temporary sorrow has relegated Rama's nobility to the background. Lakshmana is trying to restore the same)'.

Thus persuaded by Lakshmana, Rama who was hitherto besieged by grief and delusion, could set them aside and regain patience.

No more disturbed by delusion, Rama of unimaginable valour, crossed the very brilliant Pampa with beautiful plants floating on its surface.

The great Rama was overcome with grief while scanning the entire forest with its streams and caves. Engrossed in her thoughts, dejected at heart and inflicted with pain, he set both, accompanied by Lakshmana.

The great soul, Lakshmana, striding like a mighty elephant, with a steady mind, followed Rama dutifully, protecting him with his strength.

The swiftfooted, mighty king of monkeys saw those two men of wonderful appearance as they were wandering at Rishyamuka. He neither got scared nor showed signs of nervousness.

The great soul, Sugriva, walking slowly like an elephant saw both of them and became despondent, worried and immersed in fear.

Having seen the mighty Rama and Lakshmana, all other monkeys got frightened and ran into a sacred and safe hermitage.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे प्रथमस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the first sarga of Kishkindakanda of the Holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.