Vali, gazing all around, breathing slowly and sighing feably beheld Sugriva at first instance, Sugriva who was standing in front of his own son.

Vali, the lord of monkeys, lovingly said to Sugriva, who had won a victoryः

'O Sugriva you ought not to accuse me of exiling you, and wresting your wife. My  mind was deluded by the force of fate that controls one's future.

'O dear I believe that both of us are not destined to enjoy the love and happiness that come together to brothers.



'I am leaving this world soon, along with this vast kingdom, prosperity and untarnished fame.

'O warrior king you should do whatever I request you at this hour even though it may not be easy.

'Look at this young Angada fallen on the ground, face flooded with tears. Raised with comfort, he deserves to be kept happy.

'He is dearer to me than my life. Take care of him like your own son. He is separated from me. Take care of him in all respects, so that he is not deprived of anything.

'O lord of monkeys from now on, you alone will be his father, provider of everything, saviour and protector in danger.

'This prosperous son of Tara, your equal in valour, will remain with you in the forefront to crush demons.

'This mighty hero Angada, son of Tara, is young and dynamic. He will strike (the enemy) in a fitting manner in war.

'Tara, daughter of Sushena, is wise and efficient in discerning subtle matters and in foreseeing unexpected events.

'Tara's opinion is never wrong. It does not change. Whatever she speaks is right and should be carried out without any doubt.

'You ought to carry out Rama's work without hesitation. If you do not, it will be unrighteous and harmful.

'O Sugriva put on this divine golden necklace. It has great brilliance. Its present lustre may be gone when I am dead.'

Thus spoken to by Vali with brotherly affection, Sugriva gave up joy (of victory) and appeared dull like the Moon eclipsed by planet Rahu.

On hearing Vali's words, Sugriva became composed with no illfeeling. Considering it to be proper, he received with his permission the golden necklace.

Having given the golden necklace to Sugriva,Vali, feeling ready to depart, looked at his son Angada who stood by and spoke affectionatelyः

'Enduring pleasure or pain equally with due regard to time and place favourable to you or otherwise, you should submit to the will of Sugriva.

'O longarmed one you have always been affectionately brought up by me. Sugriva may not rear you that way.

'O conqueror of foes do not align with his enemies or with the friends of his enemies. Remain selfrestrained and loyal to Sugriva. Be subordinate to his will.

'You are not to be excessively friendly or otherise as both are serious mistakes. Therefore, be insightful.'

Having spoken this, tormented by the arrow, eyes popping out and his dreadful teeth ejected, Vali remained drained of life.

Then the best of the monkeys and their troop leaders bewailed the death of Vali, crying bitterly.

Lord of monkeys having gone to heaven, Kishkinda looked desolate including the pleasure gardens, the mountains and forests. The monkeys also became dull.

(The vanaras wailed aloud saying) 'The forests and gardens looked connected together with the flowers that swayed by his speed .Who can do that now?

'Great soul, Vali endowed with stout shoulders joined a duel with a gandharva called Golabha for fifteen years nonstop night and day.

'In the sixteenth year Golabha, the uncontrollable enemy was killed by Vali with his dreadful fangs and rendered protection to everybody. How did he get killed?'

Just as the cattle get frightened when the leader of the herd gets killed in a huge forest full of lions, the young monkey became puzzled when the chief of monkeys got killed.

Then Tara, immersed in a sea of sorrow, looked at the face of her dead husband and sank, embracing Vali, like a creeper clinging to the massive tree when the tree is cut down.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे द्वाविंशस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the twentysecond sarga of Kishkindakanda of the Holy Ramayana, the first epic, composed by sage Valmiki.