Rama and Lakshmana were equally sad. Rama, scion of the Kakutstha race, consoled Sugriva, Tara as well as Angada in the following wordsः

'No lamentation revives the dead. So you should take up whatever is required now.

'You have to go the worldly way. You have shed tears enough. Time is passing. You cannot perform the funeral after the lapse of appropriate time.

'Fate is the cause of the world. Fate is the means of accomplishment. Fate assigns duties to all beings.

'No one can control another's action. No one including God can be the agent of action. No one has the power to entrust duty to others. This entire world is governed by one's own nature. Nature in turn is governed by Time (fate).

'God (though independent) does not deviate from Time. Time cannot be escaped or  trangressed. It cannot be condoned or avoided. No one can transgress their own nature.

'Time has no consideration for relationship, friendship, or kinship or valour. Time itself is the cause. It is never under one's control.

'However a wise man should visualise the turn of events in course of time with the right vision. Dharma, artha and kama are controlled by an order laid down by Time.

'Vali, king of monkeys is dead and gone. He acted according to his own nature and attained the sacred fruit of his action comensurate with dharma, wealth and pleasures  in this world.

'Great Vali has earned a place in heaven by virtue of his own dharma and not caring for his own life .He has got the heavenly position he earned.

'The state attained by the chief of monkeys is an excellent one.Therefore there is no need to regret. Attend to your duties (relating to rites)'

Seeing Sugriva had lost his senses, Lakshmana, the slayer of enemy warriors humbly said at the end of Rama's addressः

'O Sugriva perform with Tara and Angada the funeral obsequies relating to the cremation of Vali.

'Let the best of dry logs and sandalwood be ordered for the funeral rites of Vali.

'Pacify the despondent Angada so that he does not entertain childish thoughts any more. This city is under your control (now).

'Let Angada for his part collect garlands of many kinds, clothes, clarified butter, oil, fragrants and all that is required to be procured.

'O Tara quickly get a swiftmoving litter fastened with ropes specially suitable for this occasion.

'Let those who are strong and capable among the monkeys be ready to carry the dead body of Vali on a litter'.

Having thus spoken to Sugriva, Lakshmana, son of Sumitra, slayer of enemies, stood by his brother

On hearing Lakshmana, Tara in an excited state quickly entered the cave city to get the litter.

Tara jumped in on to the litter carried by strong monkeys.

A swiftmoving, marvellous palanquin designed by Viswakarma was brought. Covered with colourful pictures of birds and trees on every side it looking like an aerial chariot fit for saints. Fitted with a splendid seat grilled windows, artificially made small caverns and grottos of wood was embellished with carvings of mountains, choice ornaments and garlands. With red sandal paste, red scented flowers and red lotus garlands, it resembled the rising Sun.

Seeing the palanquin, Rama said to Lakshmana 'Let the body of Vali be placed in the palanquin quickly and last rites duly performed'.

Then Sugriva along with Angada, crying aloud bitterly, lifted the body (of Vali) and placed it on the palanquin.

Vali's deadbody was placed on the palanquin, decorated with many ornaments, garlands and clothes

King Sugriva, lord of the monkeys, said, 'Let the funeral rites of my noble sire be performed in a fitting manner'.

'Let the monkeys march in front, showering many different gems in large quantities and let the palanquin follow.

'Let the monkeys perform the funeral rites of our lord in an honourable way as expensively as has been done with regard to the obsequies of kings who ruled over this land.

Tara, Angada and the other bereaved monkeys hastened to perform the funeral  ceremony of Valiweeping.

Then all the female monkeys who were in his (Vali's) harem walked past the deadbody of Vali, crying again and again 'Alas, Oh hero'

Tara along with other female monkeys followed their lord, crying pathetically.

When the female monkeys were weeping in the midst of the forest, it looked as if the forest and the hills were also mourning.

Tormented with tears, the monkeys prepared in a solitary place surrounded by waters a pyre on the sandbank of a mountain stream.

Putting down the palanquin from their shoulders on the lonely spot, the bearers stood in tearswaiting.

Seeing her husband lying in the palanquin, Tara, full of grief placed Vali's head on her lap and cried.

'Why don't you look at me, oppressed with tears, O monkey king, O my venerable lord, O longarmed one, O my dear?

'O revered self even though you are bereft of life, your face looks cheerful. It carries the colour of the setting Sun, and looks the same when you were alive.

'O monkey a single arrow from Rama who appeared in the forest in the form of death dragged you away from us and turned us all into widows.

'O king of kings why don't you understand that these female monkeys, your wives who were dear to you have come on foot this long distance with great difficulty?

'O lord of monkeys these moonfaced wives were indeed once your favourites. Why don't you look at them? Why don't you look Sugriva?

'O king O sinless hero Tara and others, your ministers as well as the inhabitants of the capital are here sitting around you.

'O conqueror of enemies give these monkeys their due in accordance with their status and send them back as you used to do when they were passionately sporting in your company here in this forest.

The griefstricken female monkeys helped Tara, overwhelmed with sorrow due to her husband's death, rise from the ground.

Then Angada, helped by Sugriva, placed his father's body on the pyre, with his senses numbed in deep sorrow.

Overwhelmed with sorrow, he offered fire to the father who had set out on a long journey (to heaven). As per tradition he went round the pyre anteclock wise.

The monkeys set Vali's body to be consumed by fire as per tradition and proceeded to an auspicious river of pure water in order to offer oblation (to the departed soul).

Then the monkeys along with Sugriva and Tara positioning Angada in the forefront made waterofferings (to Vali) collectively.

Mighty Rama, who was equally sorrowful and pitiable as Sugriva, directed the performance of funeral rites.

After setting fire to Vali of mighty prowess whose tawny face was glowing like fire, who was killed openly by the great arrow of Rama of the Ikshvaku race, Sugriva approached Rama, and Lakshmana.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे पञ्चविंशस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the twentyfifth sarga of Kishkindakanda of the Holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.