Having heard the great Lakshmana Sugriva said to Hanuman, the minister who stood by his sideः

'Send for the monkeys residing at the five mountains of Mahendra, Himavan, Vindhya, Kailasa and the whitepeaked mount Mandara those monkeys residing on the western mountains, on the sea shore and on mount Udaya shining like the rising Sun monkeys like dark clouds shining in the twilight Sun those at the fierce Padmatala garden and those at the Anjana mountain who resemble dark clouds like collyrium  and are as strong as elephants those monkeys of golden complexion residing at the red arsenic mountain caves beside mount Meru those on mount Meru and Dhumra who are of bright red colour like the rising Sun drinking liquor Maireya the monkeys of terrific speed at mount Maharuna those staying at the delightful hermitages in the forests, and those living on the ground all must be cajoled and persuaded to report at once.

'This is in addition to the monkeys for whom swiftfooted messengers have already been sent.

'Get all the monkeys including those engaged in carnal pleasures and those slow in movement all at once on my command.

'Kill those evilminded ones within ten days for disobeying the royal orders.

'The hundreds of thousands of crores of obedient lionlike monkeys should proceed in all directions at my command.

'Fierce monkeys, comparable to clouds and mountains in appearance shall go as though covering the sky from here at my command.



Having heard Sugriva's command, Hanuman, son of the Windgod, sent powerful monkeys in all directions.

The monkeys ordered by the king, traversed the pathway of birds and heavenly bodies, the path Lord Visnu had trod. [Noteः the sky is called Vishnupada since Lord Visnu set his foot on the sky in his incarnation as Vamana.]

The messenger monkeys drove in all those living on the sea shore, mountains, forests as well as banks of lakes in order to serve the cause of Rama.

In response to the command of the king, who was like death to them, the monkeys came at once, driven by fear from Sugriva.

Then three crores of swiftfooted monkeys, dark like collyrium, rushed forth to the mountain to meet Rama.

Ten crores of monkeys shining like pure molten gold, staying on the best of mountains where the Sun sets moved towards Kishkinda.

From the peaks of Kailasa mountain moved out one thousand crores of monkeys who were of bright colour like the lion's mane.

Then monkeys residing at mount Himavan feeding on fruits and roots came in thousands of crores. (This number is called Shankha 1000,000,000,000,0, it is one digit higher than Mahapadma.)

From the Vindhya mountain came down thousands of crores of swiftfooted monkeys of terrific deeds. They were fierce like fire (Angaraka).

The monkeys residents of Tamala forest on the shores of the ocean of milk feeding on coconuts arrived from the groves in countless number.

An army of swiftmoving monkeys came from the caves, from the banks of rivers and forests as though it was swallowing up the Sungod.

The monkeys sent earlier to hasten all their counterparts saw mount Himavat from the great tree.

A divine, wonderful, delightful Yagna dedicated to Lord Siva used to be performed on the beautiful (Himalayan) mountain in the past so that the minds of all deities were satisfied.

There the monkeys saw the Yajna, and partook the fruits and roots produced out of the havis which tasted sweet like nectar.

Any one who shares even a little of the divine, delicious fruits and roots grown out of that havis will have no hunger or thirst for a month.

The monkey leaders who lived on fruits collected the divine fruits, roots as well as medicinal herbs.

The monkeys also collected finesmelling flowers from the sacrificial altar to please Sugriva with.

The monkey leaders from all over the earth arrived quickly, leading the hordes of them.

In a short while the swiftmoving leaders of the monkeys groups reached Kishkinda quickly.

Offering all kinds of medicinal herbs, fruits and roots collected, to Sugriva the monkeys saidः



On hearing the report from the monkeys, Sugriva the king of vanaras, accepted all the gifts they had brought him, with great pleasure.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे सप्तत्रिंशस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the thirtyseventh sarga in Kishkindakanda of the first epic, of the Holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.