On hearing Sugriva who stood with folded hands, Rama, the foremost among the upholders of righteousness, hugged him and saidः

'O scorcher of enemies, gentle Sugriva it will not be strange if Indra showers rain, if the Sun in the sky dispels darkness with his thousand rays, and if the Moon cools down the earth with his light, and a person like you helps his friend.

'O gentle Sugriva this your help to me is not surprising. You always help your friends and speak in a pleasing manner.

'O friend I will win over all enemies in war supported by you.You are a goodhearted friend and you alone should help me.

Just as Anuhlada (son of Hiranyakasipu and brother of Prahlada) took away, Poulomi (Sachi, daughter of Puloma) deceiving Indra, this lowly demon took away Sita, daughter of the king of Videha.

'I will kill Ravana with my sharp arrows just as Indra, (who had done a hundred sacrifices) killed the proud father of Poulomi.

In the mean while the dust raised (by army of monkeys) all over obscured the intense heat from the sky and the radiance of the thousandrayed Sun.

By the spreading of dust, the quarters were not visible.The earth including the mountains gardens and forests was shaken up.

In a minute, the entire land was crowded with innumerable powerful monkeys of the size of mountains having sharp fangs.The monkey leaders with a hundred crore monkey followers, who could assume any form at their will mighty monkeys from the mountains, rivers and seas vanaras thundering like clouds and other free vanaras who were wanderers vanaras red in colour like the rising Sun, tawny coloured ones like the Moon some who were of the hue of white lotus filaments and some vanaras residing in mount Meru came there.

Then appeared the glorious warrior named Satavali, followed by ten thousand crore of monkeys.

(Next came) the valiant father of Tara of golden complexion like mount Meru followed by ten thousand crore of vanaras.

Likewise mighty father of Ruma, fatherinlaw of Sugriva, reached there accompanied by a thousand crore monkeys.

Then arrived Kesari, the wise and illustrious monkey, foremost and the best among vanaras, father of Hanuman. He was of the colour of lotus filaments and his countenance was red like the early morning Sun. He was accompanied by many thousands of monkeys.

Next arrived Gavaksha, king of Langurs (whose tail resembled the cow's), of fierceful courage surrounded by a thousand crore of vanaras.

Dhumra, destroyer of enemies, came next followed by two thousand crore of bears of terrible speed.

Similarly, the great warrior named Panasa, leader of the troop, reported with three crore dreadful vanaras of the size of huge mountains.

Then appeared Nila of huge body, dark like a mountain of collyrium accompanied by ten crore vanaras.

Then arrived the leader of five crore vanaras, the great warrior Gavaya who resembled a golden mountain.

Then the strong Darimukha, leader of a thousand crore monkeys approached Sugriva.

Two very powerful sons of Asvini, Mainda and Dvivida, appeared with a thousand crore vanaras.

Strong and powerful Gaja also reached Sugriva with three crore vanaras.

Glorious Jambavan, king of bears, stood before Sugriva with ten thousand crore vanaras.

Sturdy and victorious vanara called Rumanvan came swiftly followed by a hundred crore vanaras.

Then came Gandhamadana with a hundred thousand crore of vanaras following him.

Then arrived the heir apparent, Angada, whose prowess is comparable to that of his father with him came a thousand padmas and a hundred sankus of followers.

And Tara (brother of Ruma's father) of terrific valour shining like a star showed up at a distance with five crore vanaras.

Then Indrajanu the troop leader and chief of vanaras appeared along with eleven crore monkeys.

Thereafter Rambha of the colour of the rising Sun brought together an army of one thousand and one hundred ayuta troops.

Thereafter the mighty hero, leader of the troop, by name Durmukha appeared with two crore vanaras.

And Hanuman showed up surrounded by a thousand crore vanaras of frightful valour. They looked like the peaks of Kailasa mountain.

Valiant Nala also arrived surrounded by a hundred crore and a hundred thousand treedwellers (monkeys).

Then the illustrious Dadhimukha, great Sugriva's favourite leader reached with ten crore vanaras.

Sarabha, Kumuda, Vahni and Ramhi and many other vanara troops who can assume any form at their will and others from all over the land, mountains and forest advanced towards Sugriva. All the outstanding vanaras of the earth came and covered the land.

The monkeys came leaping, jumping and roaring in enthusiasm and surrounded Sugriva just as clouds surround the Sun.

The leaders of monkeys possesing sturdy shoulders made many kinds of noises and reported to Sugriva, bending their heads in reverence.

Thereafter the vanaras came close to Sugriva freely and on reaching him stood, offering salutations with folded hands.

Sugriva, knower of dharma, at once presented all the prominent vanaras to Rama, and standing with folded hands said.

Sugriva told the chiefs to station the forces by the side of swift mountain streams, in forests, and hills and ascertain their exact number.  इत्यार्ष श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे एकोनचत्वारिंशस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the thirtyninth sarga of Kishkindakanda of the first epic, the Holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.