Sugriva then sends in the southern direction another vanara army known for their excellence.

The extraordinary Sugriva commanded Nila, son of the firegod, Hanuman, the formidable, Jambavan, son of Brahma, Suhotra, Sarari, Saragulma, Gaja, Gavaksha, Gavaya, Sushena, Vrishabam, Mainda, Dvivida, Vijaya, Gandhamadana, the two sons of Firegod, Ulkamuka and Asanga including Angada, leader of the group, to proceed. All of them were endowed with speed and valour.

Then Sugriva ordered mighty Angada to lead the group of the heroic monkeys in the southern direction.

Sugriva, the monkey king, explained to the monkey chiefs about the inaccessible places in the southern direction.

'Search for Sita all over Vindhya of a thousand peaks filled with several trees and creepers, and along the river Narmada. Then proceed to Godavari, lovely Krishnaveni, Mahanadi, Varada and Mahabhaga inhabited by terrific serpents.You may search Mekhala, Utkala and Dasarna cities, Asvavanti and Avanti countries also.

'Look for Sita in the countries of Vidarbha and Rishika, in the picturesque country of Mashaka, Vanga and Kalinga and all over Kausika. Look for her in mountains caves and on river banks, in Dandaka forest, in Godavari, in Andhra also in Pundra, Chola and Pandya countries and all over Kerala.

'Look for Sita all over mount Ayomukha (known as Malaya), rich in ores. It has wonderful peaks. It looks colourful with the forest in bloom. This great mountain is full of sandalwood forest.

'Then you will see the sacred river Cauvery with pure and auspicious water, where celestial nymphs sport.

'Dwelling on the top of that Malaya mountain you will find celebrated sage Agastya, resplendent like the Sun.

'You will then come cross the great river Tamraparni infested with alligators. Cross it with the permission of the sage pleased (with you).

'With its wonderful islands covered with lovely sandalwood forests, the river mingles with the ocean just as a young beloved meets her lover.

'O monkeys leaving that river, you will find encrusted with pearls the wonderful golden gate of the city of Pandyas (modern Madurai).

'Then on reaching the sea shore, decide the course of action. Sage Agastya has set up (between the moat of the city and and the sea) a glorious golden mountain Mahendra. Filled with colourful trees, it stretches into the sea.

'That mountain with several kinds of colourful trees and vines is frequented by gods, sages and prominent yakshas like siddhas and charanas. It is exceedingly delightful and even the thousandeyed Indra keeps visiting this place on full and new Moon days.

'Beyond this, on the other side of the sea stretching over an area of a hundred yojanas is an island difficult to reach for humans. Which you may explore.



'In the midst of the southern sea is a famous ogress, Angaraka (also Simhika) by name who swallows humans by capturing them even by their shadows.

'In this way make sure wherever you have a doubt (of Sita's presence) and proceed to look for the consort of Rama, king of limitless lustre.



'It looks bright, spreading its radiance like the Sun and Moon. It is surrounded by the sea. Its peaks appear as though scratching the sky.

'The Sun resorts to its golden peak. The Moon rests over its silver peak. Neither the ungrateful, nor the mean nor the unbelievers can behold this (phenomenon).

'O monkeys bowing down to that mountain, proceed in search of Sita. O unassailable vanaras, beyond this mountain is another called Suryavan. It is at a distance of fourteen yojanas and it is difficult to cover that distance.

'Beyond that mountain lies Vaidyuta, a hill with trees yielding lovely fruits in all seasons which can satisfy all desires.

'O monkeys eat your cherlshed roots and fruits and drink the best of honey there and proceed further.

'There you will find a mountain called Kunjara pleasing to the eye and pleasing to the heart. That is the hermitage of Agastya built by Visvakarma.

'The hermitage of Agastya is one yojana in breadth and ten yojanas in height. It is wonderful, built of gold and adorned with many gems.

'There on that mountain (Kunjara) stands a city called Bhogavati, which is the abode of serpents. It has wide corridors. Guarded on all sides, it is unassailable since it is protected by venomous serpents with sharp fangs. The wise serpent king Vasuki resides there. (Bhogavati is the replica of the city of the same name in Patala, the sixth subterranean region)

'Emerging from this city of Bhogavati, search all possible hidden places.

'With this place passed, you will see a huge mountain named Rishaba of the size of a bull filled with all gems.

'There grow sandal trees of amazing colours like that of gorochana, padmaka (like lotus), greenish black and red as fire.

'Never touch when you see the sandal trees, for they are guarded by dreadful gandharvas named Rohitas.

'Five ghandharva kings named Sailusha, Gramani, Sigru, Subhra and Babhru who have the radiance like the Sun reside there. It is the abode of those who have done meritorious deeds.They glow like Sun, Moon and Fire.

'The divine people who have earned a place in heaven stay there at the end of their life on earth. Beyond, lies the dreadful world of deceased ancestors. It is not possible for you to enter that place.

'O heroic monkeys that is the capital of Yama (god of death) covered with pitch darkness. You can go till that place. Beyond, there is no access for the earthlings.

'Ransack this and all other places you can see. You should search for the whereabouts of Vaidehi before you return.

'He who returns in a month to announce Sita has been found will spend his life in luxury with as much prosperity as I do have.

'None will be dearer to me than he. Even if he has made a mistake, he will be to me dear and near.

(NoteःThe Vindhya range and the several rivers mentioned here are not south of Kishkinda.The inconsistency is irreconcilable. Candidly speaking the geographical description is not at all factual. Some interpolator in the north (Kurukshetra as central region) has committed several anachronous inconsistencies betraying his ignorance of geography.)  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्दाकाण्डे एकचत्वारिंशस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the fortyfirst sarga in Kishkindakanda of the first epic, the Holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.