After sending the monkeys in the southern direction, Sugriva said to the cloudlike troop leader called Sushena.

King (Sugriva) went with folded hands to Tara's father, his fatherinlaw, of terrifying valour, offered salutation and saidः

Sugriva spoke to the great lustrous monkey Archisman, son of the eminent sage Marichi who possessed the wisdom and prowess of Indra and was comparable to Vaineteya (Garuda) in lustre. He also spoke to the other sons of Maricha, called Marichas, who were very strong and known as Archismalas (garlands of continuous glow) and asked all of them to proceed in the western direction.

'O foremost of monkeys with Sushena as your group leader accompanied by two hundred thousand vanaras, go and search for Vaidehi.

'O leaders of monkeys search for Sita in the countries of Saurashtra, and also Bahlika, Chandrachitra, in delightful villages and vast towns, also in Kukshi covered haphazardly with punnaga, bakula and uddalaka trees as well as ketaka shrubs.

'O monkeys the auspicious rivers with cool waters flow towards the western region. Search in the groves inhabited by ascetics, other forests, mountains, cliffs, in the desertland. Search in the inaccessible western region surrounded by mountains. Then proceed to the western ocean infested with whales and alligators, which cannot be easily disturbed.

'There the monkeys may roam about the Ketaka shrubs, tamala thickets and coconut groves.

'Look for Sita as well as the residence of Ravana.You should find the whereabouts of Sita in the mountains and forests located on the sea shore. Search in the city of Murachi, beautiful city of Jata, Avanti, Angalopa and in the unnoticed forestland. Look for her in the vast kingdoms and cities all over.

'There is a lofty mountain with a hundred peaks and great trees at the confluence of river Sindhu and the sea. It is known as Hemagiri (golden mountain).

'On the slopes of that mountain you will find lions called Pakshagamas, that is lions with wings. They carry the whales, fishes and elephants from the sea to their shelters on the beautiful mountain slopes.

'The proud elephants wandering on the mountain slopes, and on the vast tract filled with water would be happy trumpeting like thundering clouds. They roam in the caves of lions.

'The monkeys capable of assuming any form at their will should search the scraping peaks of the golden mountain (Himagiri) with colourful trees without delay.

'O monkeys you will see the dazzling golden tip of a mountain called Pariyatra towards the end of the sea. It is extended over a hundred yojanas and dificult to gaze because of its brilliance.

'There dwell twentyfour crore of terrific gandharvas blazing like fire who can assume any form.They lead an ascetic life.

'Collected together in thousands, and radiating like fire, they live there. Even the very brave vanaras should not go close to them.

'You should not pluck any fruits from those woods, for courageous gandharvas protect the fruits of the trees. It is difficult to go there, for those heroes have frightening bravery.

'Exert yourself in your search for Janaki. Indeed there will be no fear from them, if you behave like normal monkeys in a natural way.

'(Beyond) there is a glorious mountain called Vajra of the colour of Vaidurya, hard as a diamond with different kinds of trees and vines.The mountain extends evenly to a stretch of a hundred yojanas.There are caves in the mountain where you may look for her with due effort.

'Then move to the fourth part (of the western sea) where you will see a mountain called Chakravan occupying a quarter part of the sea.You will find there a thousandspiked wheel built by Visvakarma.

'It was there that the Supreme Lord Visnu, having slain Hayagriva and Panchajanam, recovered the discus and conch for himself.

'Look for Vaidehi and Ravana in the wide caves and colourful slopes of the (Chakravan) mountain.

'Plunge deep down into the sea and you will see a goldenpeaked mountain called Varaha, the residence of Varuna.It is extended over sixty four yojanas in the sea.

'On the (Varaha) mountain is the city called Pragjyotisha, which is full of gold.There lives the evilminded demon Naraka.

'There all over the wonderful slopes and wide caves look for Vaidehi and Ravana.





'Possessor of tawny horses, king Indra who killed demon Pakasasana was consecrated by gods at this mountain since known as Meghavan.

'On crossing the hill ruled by Indra you will reach the rows of sixty thousand mountains of gold shining like the brilliance of the rising Sun. The mountains glow with golden trees filled with bloom.

'In the midst of the sixty thousand hills stands Meru, King of mountains. It is the northern mountain, blessed by the Sungod with a boon in the past.

'The Sungod said to mount Meru, 'By my grace all the trees and hillocks of this king of mountains will shine in golden red, the gods, gandharvas and demons who dwell here will have golden radiance '.

The Visvadevas, Vasus, Maruts, and the gods reach Meru, this great king of mountains, in the evening twilight. Worshipped by them, the Sungod sets behind the mountain and becomes invisible to all beings.

'Crossing ten thousand yojanas swiftly in half a moment, the Sun touches the mount behind which he sets.

'There is a great divine abode glowing like the Sungod on the peak of the mountain.It is a cluster of mansions built by Visvakarma.

'It is the residence of Varuna, who holds the noose in his hand.It is an enchanting place, full of trees attracting flocks of various birds.

'Between mount Asta (the mountain behind which the Sun sets) and Meru there is a shining golden palm tree with ten high peaks and wonderful altars around.

'Look for Vaidehi and Ravana all over those inaccessible mountains, lakes and rivers.

'The sage Merusavarna, knower of dharma, famous for his penance and comparable to Brahma lives there with him on Meru.

'Bow down, touch the feet of the seer Merusavarna, who glows like the Sun and then enquire from him about Sita.

'The world of living beings is extended to this extent. The Sun dispels darkness at the end of the night and thereafter reaches the mountain behind which he sets (at the end of the day).

'O great monkeys you can go only up to that point. The Sun's rays do not extend beyond this and it has no boundaries.We do not know about the area beyond this limit.

'Go and find out Sita and the abode of Ravana. After this, return to the mountain behind which the Sun sets and come back on completion of a month.

'If you tarry beyond a month, you will be slain. My fatherin law, the brave hero will go with your group.

'You should obey him. You are meant to carry out his orders. He is not only my fatherinlaw but also a valiant, strong and powerful hero and my preceptor.

'My fatherinlaw will be your leader. His authority will be final in all matters. Accept  his authority and look for Vaidehi in the western direction.

'We will be achieving our goal when the consort of the highly glorious king Rama is found. And we will return the help he has rendered.

'You may do any work after careful thinking, if it helps to achieve the purpose, and if the work to be performed is in accordance with time and place.'

Sushena and other leaders heard the expert advice of Sugriva, and took leave of him.They went towards the western direction ruled by Varuna.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे द्विचत्वारिंशस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the fortysecond Sarga in the Kishkinda Kanda of the first epic, the Holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.