When the chieftains of the monkeys left, Rama enquired Sugriva, how he had come to know the regions of the entire earth (which is a mandala. a circular form).

Then offering reverential salutation to Rama, Sugriva said, 'I shall narrate in detail. Listen, O bull among men

Vali chased the demon Dundubhi in buffalo form into a cave of mount Malaya in order to kill him.

'Then I waited at the entrance of the cave with due loyalty. A year passed. Yet Vali did not return.

'There seeing the cave overflowing with the gushing blood, I was bewildered, thinking that my brother might have been killed. I suffered intense agony.

'Thereafter, convinced that my brother was killed, I placed a mountainsize rock at the entrance of the cave so that Dundubhi will be destroyed, unable to come out of the cave.

'I lost hope of his life and came back to Kishkinda. Having got the kingdom, and also Ruma and Tara, I was anointed king and ruled it fearlessly with all friends.



'The evilminded Vali, having lost his selfcontrol, ran after me in anger, to kill me and my ministers. I kept running.





'Then I ran in the eastern direction and saw many trees, lakes, rivers and beautiful mountains.

'There I saw, filled with minerals the mountain behind which the Sun rises and the milky ocean frequented by the apsaras.

'O king chased thus by Vali, I ran and turned back and ran againfast.

'Then chased by Vali, I changed my present direction from the east towards the southern quarter where Vindhya mountain stood with its, beautiful sandal trees.

'I was looking at the trees and mountains in the southern direction, I reached the western quarter pursued by Vali.

'Looking at the places around, I reached the best of mountains where the Sun sets (I found Vali still chasing me) and ran towards the north.

'I saw Himavan and mount Meru on the north and the northern sea. Still pursued by Vali, I could not know where to go when wise Hanuman spoke to me these wordsः

'I remembed Matanga's curse to Vali, king of monkeys. Vali would not enter the site of Matanga's hermitage as his head would break into a hundred pieces if he did'. Therefore we thought it would be safe for us to reside in that place.

'O prince Rama then I reached mount Rishyamuka which Vali did not enter out of fear  of the curse of Matanga.

'O king that way I surveyed the entire earth directly and returned to this cave and lived here.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे षटचत्वारिंशस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the fortysixth sarga in Kishkindakanda of the first epic, the Holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.