Wise Angada, exhausted after the search, collected the monkeys, and consoling them, said slowlyः

'We have searched here, there, everywhere, in dense forests, hills, forts, impenetrable caverns and mountain ranges. But we could find neither Janaki who is like a goddess nor the demon who abducted her.



'You should keep searching on till we see Sita, Janaka's daughter, giving up laziness and sorrow and sleep that is overpowering us.

'It is said, zeal, capability, and fortitude can overcome defeat and lead to success. Therefore I am saying this.

'Search this impenetrable forest even now, O you denizens of this forest Give up grief, let us all once again ransack this forest.



'Sugriva, the monkey king, is wrathful and awards severe punishment. We should ever bear in mind the (purpose of the) great self, Rama.

'I have said all this for your good. You may carry it out, if it pleases you. Speak freely if there is any other course left for all of us, O monkeys'

Having heard Angada, Gandhamadana worn out by thirst and exhaustion, replied in a feeble toneः

'What Angada says is appropriate, beneficial and also favourable. Carry out his command.

'Once again let us explore the mountains, caverns, forests, desolate places and mountain streams.



Once again the monkeys rose up and started exploring the mountain ranges of Vindhya and the forests surrounding the southern side.

Eager to find Sita, the best of monkeys climbed the silver mountain rich with peaks and caverns resembling the autumnal clouds. And looked out into the Lodhra grove and the garden of seven leaves (banara plantations).

Even after scaling up the peak, the exhausted, heroic monkeys could not find Vaidehi, the dear queen of Rama.

Having looked all over the mountain and many caverns, those monkeys got down from the mountain.

Descending to the foothills, the exhausted monkeys became quiet. Fatigued and disheartened, they assembled under a tree, stood for a moment and then lay down.

Resting for a while, the frustrated monkeys resumed their search throughout the southern direction.

The bulls among vanaras and Hanuman, the chief of the group again started exploring everywhere in the Vindhya range starting from the beginning.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे एकोनपञ्चाशस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the fortyninth sarga in Kishkindakanda of the first epic, the Holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.