On meeting the distinguished, righteous ascetic woman robed in deer skin, Hanuman saidः

'We are exhausted with thirst and hunger. We are fatigued. (Hence) we entered this dark cave all at once(without waiting for permission).

'Thirst drove us into this cave on earth. We are amazed at the kind of many wonderful objects here and have nearly lost our senses. We are tormented with pain.

'To whom do these golden trees resembling the rising Sun belong? For whom are these tasty roots and fruits? Whose are these manystoreyed golden houses with glittering windows adorned with silver lattices encrusted with gems?

'By whose prowess are these golden trees yielding sacred fragrant flowers and fruits? How are these golden lotuses created in the clear water? How is it that here are golden fishes and tortoises? Whose fruit of penance is this? Is it by your power? We do not know. You should tell all of us everything'.

The noble ascetic committed to the welfare of all beings replied to Hanuman's enquiryः

'O bull among monkeys this golden forest was created by the magical power of a deceitful demon called Maya.

This best of wonderful mansions has been constructed earlier by Visvakarma, the chief (architect) of the demons.

'He (Maya) performed rigorous penance in the dense forest for thousands of years seeking the favour of Brahma, the creator and obtained a boon that he should inherit all the wealth of Usanas (Shukra).

Then the mighty Maya who received the power of (executing) desires created this mansion and lived here happily for some time in this dense forest.

'Seeing this great demon in love with a heavenly apsara (nymph) called Hema, Lord Indra with all his might attacked him with his thunderbolt.

'Thus this wonderful forest and the golden house with all luxury were given away permanently to Hema by the creator Brahma.

'O best of monkeys daughter of Meru Sauvarni, I am Svayamprabha (selfilluminator), caretaker of this house of Hema. (Meru Sauvarni is the eleventh Manu).

'Hema, wellversed in dance and music is a fast friend to me. She granted a boon (that none can resist me) and gave this house of which I am the caretaker.

'What is your mission? For what purpose have you come to this inaccessible forest? What are you looking for?How did you find this?

'Eat these wonderful roots and fruits and have these drinks and then tell me all about you.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे एकपञ्चशस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends of the fiftyfirst sarga in Kishkindakanda of the first epic, the Holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.