On hearing the pathetic words from the monkeys who had given up hope of life, the loudvoiced vulture wailing repliedः

'O monkeys, the one you said to have been killed by mighty Ravana in a combat was my younger brother, Jatayu.

'Even after I have heard this, I cannot avenge my brother's death as I am old, I have no wings, and I have no energy enough (to fight).

'In olden days, when Indra killed Vrutra we (Jatayu and I) seeking to challenge him reached the Sun blazing with a garland of beams.

'Flying in the sky at a violently high speed, we reached the meridian of the Sun when, unable to bear the heat, Jatayu became weak.

'Seeing my brother tormented due to the Sun's radiance I was overwhelmed with  grief. Out of love I covered him with both my wings.

'O bulls among monkeys, consequently my wings were burnt and I dropped down on Vindhya. Here I have been living, knowing not my brother's whereabouts.'

To these words of Jatayu's brother, Sampati, Angada, the learned heir apparent repliedः

'I have heard you. If you are the brother of Jatayu, tell us about the abode of that demon if you know.

'Tell us about Ravana, king of the demons who is unaware of the consequences. If you know his residence, tell us if it is near or far.'

Then Jatayu's elder brother, the glorious Sampati, said these pleasing, befitting wordsः

'O monkeys I am a vulture. My wings are burnt and my strength is depleted. The only substantial help I can render Rama is through my words.

'I know Varuna's worlds(seas and oceans) and all the three worlds measured by three strides by Vamana. Indeed I also know about the friction between the great gods and demons and the churning of the ocean for nectar.

'Rama's work is my primary duty. (But) my strength is drained by age and I have lost my vitality.

'I saw a young lady of beautiful appearance, adorned with all kinds of ornaments borne away by the evilminded Ravana. That dainty lady was calling out, 'O Rama, O Lakshmana' and was crying aloud. She was throwing away her ornaments and was  wriggling to get out of Ravana's grip.

'Her fine silk garment was shining like the radiance of the Sun on the mountain peak, like lightning against the dark cloud. (That was Ravana).

'Since she was uttering Rama's name I think she is Sita. (Now) I will tell you about the demon's abode. Listen

'He is Vishrava's son and halfbrother of Vaishravana. His name is Ravana and he resides in the city of Lanka.

'The beautiful city of Lanka is an island, a hundred yojanas away from here.It was built by Visvakarma.

'The city has golden gates, golden platforms, huge, goldencoloured, uniformly built mansions surrounded by a tall boundary wall of the colour of sunlight.

'You will see in the city of Lanka, the princess from Videha, daughter of Janaka, a picture of dejection, robed in silk, confined in the harem of Ravana, wellprotected by  demonesses.

'O monkeys traverse a hundred yojanas across the sea. On reaching the southern coast you will be able to see Ravana's Lanka defended and surrounded by the sea. Now proceed swiftly and prove your strength.

'By intuition I know you would see Sita and return. On the first plane you will see sparrows and birds which live on grain. On the second, you will see crows living on the food offered to the dead and birds living on the fruits of trees, and then cocks, cranes and kraunchas moving on the third plane, on the fourth, hawks and falcons and on the fifth, vultures.

'O bulls among monkeys swans blessed with strength, vigour, beauty and youth move in the sixth region. Beyond, on the seventh plane, you will see the descendants of Garuda.

'From here I see Ravana and Janaki. We (vultures) have a divine golden vision and great power.

'O monkeys therefore, by the strength of food and by nature we can always see beyond a hundred yojanas from this edge.

'Our movement and vision naturally extends to distant places. For those fighting on foot, the movement is restricted to the extent of foot movement.



'Look out for some means to cross the salty ocean. You will see Vaidehi, and return, your mission accomplished.

'Take me to the ocean, the abode of Varuna. I intend to offer oblation to my brother, a great soul who is in heaven.'

Th mightiest of monkeys carried Sampati, whose wings were totally burnt, to the sea shore and after he had offered oblations took him back to the same place. Having obtained all information from the king of vultures the monkeys were very happy.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे अष्टपञ्चशस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the fiftyeighth sarga in Kishkindakanda of the first epic, the Holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.