'The sage who was skilful in speech, having praised me thus and in many other ways, permitted me to leave and entered his dwelling.

'Having crawled slowly and slowly from the cave and climbed the Vindhya, I have been awaiting your arrival.

'More than a hundred years have passed and all this time I have borne the sage's words in my heart and have waited for the right time and place.

'Nishakara went on his last journey and attained heaven. Since then many sad thoughts have crisscrossed my mind and I am consumed with those thoughts.

'Whenever I intended to die, the words of the sage rang in my mind. The inspiration he gave me to preserve my life removed my agony like the glowing flames of fire that take away darkness.

'I goaded my son with harsh words saying, 'Knowing the valour of the evilminded Ravana, why did you not protect her (Sita)'

'Even after hearing the wailing of Sita, knowing that both (Rama and Lakshmana) are separated from her and considering my friendship with Dasaratha, I felt displeased with my son (as he did not make an attempt to rescue her)'.

Even as he was telling this to the monkeys his wings started appearing in their presence.

He experienced an unparalleled delight seeing wings with red feathers growing on his body, and said to the monkeysः

'By the grace of the most revered soul,sage Nishakara, both my wings that were burnt by the Sun's radiance have grown again.

'The valour, strength and even courage that I had in my youth,I am experiencing now.



Sampati, the foremost of the birds thus spoke to the monkeys and flew up from the mountain's peak keen on finding the aerial path.

The tigers among monkeys felt very happy on hearing the words of Sampati and became sure of their success with their valour.

The monkeys as strong as the wind regained courage and went in search of the daughter of Janaka in the direction of Abhijit (constellation known as Abhijit is associated with success).  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे त्रिषष्टितमस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the sixtythird sarga in Kishkindakanda of the first epic, the Holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.