Then Jambavan observed the worries of several hundred thousands of the monkey army and said to Hanumanः

'O Hanuman you are the choicest one among many scholars wellversed in all sastras. Why do you sit alone? Why do you not speak?

'Hanuman you are equal to the king of monkeys and also Rama and Lakshmana in brilliance and strength.

'You are the son of Arishtanemi (sage Kasyapa) and Vinata, and your gurulike (elder brother) is Garuda, the greatest among birds. He is powerful and and famous.

'Garuda is very powerful, swift, and famous. I have seen him snatching serpents from the ocean many times.

'The strength of your shoulders is equal to that of his (Garuda's) wings. Your speed and valour are no less.

'O leader of the monkeys you are superior in strength, wisdom, brilliance and valour to all beings. Why do you not realise your own strength?



'O dear she was famous in the three worlds, peerless in beauty and could change form at her free will. She was born of a monkey on this land by dint of a curse.

'She was the daughter of a great king of monkeys called Kunjara. That young and beautiful lady had assumed a lustrous human form decked with wonderful garlands, ornaments and silk clothes and was roving on top of the mountain which appeared like a proud raincloud.

'While the largeeyed lady was stationed on the mountain top, the Windgod gently let her auspicious yellow garment with red border fly away.

'Then he (Windgod) saw her curved, wellset thighs, her beautiful plump breasts and her lovely pleasing face.

'On seeing the broad hips, slender waist and beautiful limbs of that famous lady the Windgod was infatuated.

'The Windgod lost his control over himself. His whole being was overpowered by love for her beautiful, flawless body. He embraced her with his long arms.

'She was bewildered by this and being chaste and strict observer of chastiny she said,  'Who is it that has destroyed my monoandry?

'On hearing Anjana's words, the Windgod replied, ' O auspicious lady, I do you no harm, O lady of beautiful hips. I reached (enjoyed) you in mind, not body. You need not fear.'

'O renowned lady I have embraced you and united with you mentally (enjoyed you without physical contact).You will bring forth a son endowed with great wisdom and courage.

'He will be very powerful, illustrious and will be of great valour and strength. He will be  my equal in leaping and flying'.

'O great monkey O strongshouldered one having been assured that way, your mother was pleased and delivered you, a bull among monkeys, in a cave.

'On seeing the rising Sun in the deep forest, mistaking him to be a fruit, you wanted to seize it, when you were young.You suddenly flew into the sky and went flying towards the Sun.

'O great monkey you went three hundred yojanas and were pushed back by the Sun's radiance. Yet it did not leave you depressed.

'O great monkey while falling fast in space, wise Indra hurled his thunderbolt quickly at you, in anger.

'You fell on the edge of the mountain peak and your left chin got broken. Since then you are widely known as Hanuman (one who has a wounded chin).

The Windgod who is a carrier of fragrance and breaker of trees became very angry on seeing (the injury on) you and stopped blowing in the three worlds.



'O dear when the Windgod was pleased, Brahma gave a boon to you, to appease his anger. The boon made you truly valiant so that you cannot be struck by any weapon and killed.

'O lord observing that you are not hurt even when struck by the thunderbolt, Indra offered, one of the best boons to you, to choose to die only when you wish.

'You are a son of Kesari endowed with terrific strength and a lawful son of Maruta also. You are, therefore, equal to the very Windgod in flying and in brilliance.

'Now we have almost lost our life.You are our saviour like another monkeyking (like Garuda, king of birds).You are fully endowed with valour and courage.

'O dear when Visnu (Vamana incarnate) took three strides I circumambulated the whole earth including its mountains and trees twentyone times.

'Then on receiving orders from the gods, we collected medicinal herbs and nectar which gave us great strength.

'I have become old and my valour is depleted. At this time you are the sole resort for us. You have all the necessary qualities.

'Cheer up and advance.You are the best among the creatures that can leap.The entire army of monkeys want to see your valour.

'O Hanuman, tiger among monkeys, rise up and cross this great ocean.You have that supreme capacity among all beings.

'O Hanuman All the monkeys look dejected. Why do you delay? O warrior, act quick with your rapid speed like Trivikrama who took three strides that covered the entire universe'.

Then Hanuman, son of the Windgod, inspired by Jambavan, enlarged his body, ready to leap. The army of heroic monkeys were pleased (to see him).  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे षट्षष्टितमस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the sixtysixth sarga in Kishkindakanda of the first epic, the Holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.