Anxious to find Sita, Hanuman revisited the bowers of creepers, picture galleries and domitories located in the midst of the mansion, but did not find that beautiful Sita.

The great monkey, unable to find the beloved of Rama thought Sita might not be surviving. So he started thinking, ' I could not see her even though I have searched all  over'.

'Janaki, follower of noble path, anxious to protect her chastity must have been killed by the wicked demon king.

'The daughter of Janaka might have collapsed out of fear, looking at the distorted faces of ugly, tall and monstrous demon maids of Ravana.

'I have spent a long time with vanaras. I have not succeded in my efforts to find Sita. I dare not see Sugriva now without finding Sita and without fulfilling my task. Sugriva will punish me severely. There is no way out.'

'I have searched all over the harem. Ravana's women have been seen. (Yet) I have not been able to see noble Sita. My efforts have been wasted'.

'What will the vanaras say when I return? What should I speak when they ask meः O hero, what did you accomplish there?'

'Since the time limit has exceeded and Janaki is not spotted, surely the vanaras would sit and wait unto death. What am I going to say'?

'What will the elderly Jambavan say? What will young prince Angada and other vanaras collected there say when I reach the seashore to meet them'.

Wise Hanuman once again declared, 'being free from despair is the root cause of prosperity. Freedom from despondency gives supreme happiness and leads to success'.

'The action of a living being certainly bears fruit. Therefore, I shall put forth my best effort without feeling despondent. I will once again search everywhere in Lanka ruled by Ravana'.

'I have searched the banquet halls, bowers of creepers, picture galleries and gymnasiums. I have searched everywhere through the paths of gardens and mansions, harems and the Pushpaka chariot also.

Thinking thus, he started searching once again the basement cells, temples, homes within homes.

The great vanara searched all over again and again jumping up and down, stopping for a while and moving, opening and closing doors, by crossing, entering and exiting, jumping up and down. Thus he moved about and searched whereever there was scope to search

Even a space of four fingers in the inner chambers of Ravana was not left out in his search for Sita.

He moved in the lanes inside the boundary walls, around the shrines, altars, wells and tanks whereever it was possible to look for.

Hanuman could see only ogresses of different typesugly, deformed but could not find the daughter of Janaka.

Hanuman could see even the women of vidyadharas who were matchless in beauty among women in the world but not Janaki the beloved of Raghava.

Hanuman could see there moonfaced daughters of nagas with charming limbs but not the slimwaisted Sita.

Hanuman saw the daghters of nagas kidnapped by Ravana forcibly after victory in war but not Sita, the delight of Janaka.

The longarmed Hanuman, son of the Windgod was able to see other great women but not Sita. So he became despondent.

The son of the Wind god, the great monkey realised the futility of his efforts in crossing the sea. He brooded again.

Hanuman, son of the Windgod, came out of the aerial chariot, mind stricken with grief and started thinking again.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे द्वादशस्सर्गः।  Thus ends the twelfth sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.