Hanuman, the vanara leader, jumped from the aerial chariot to the boundary wall like a flash of lightning in the clouds.

Going round the palace of Ravana, unable to see Janaka's daughter Sita, Hanuman spoke thus to himselfः

"I have thoroughly surveyed the entire city of Lanka to please Rama, but I am unable to find Sita of flawless beauty.

"I have searched for Sita thoroughly in waterlogs, lakes, tanks, streams and rivers and all over the woods and among mountains that are difficult to reach. I have searched all over the land but have not been able to find Janaki.

"Sampati, king of vultures had said that Sita is at Ravana's palace. But I have not been able to see her.

"Can it be that Mythili, daughter of Janaka, dejected and helpless succumbed to the evil intentions of Ravana.

"Or, perhaps she might have been dropped midway from the hold of Ravana while he was flying at great speed, afraid of the deadly arrows of Rama?

"Or, perhaps while being borne away on the path frequented by siddhas, the beloved of Rama might have fallen down (dead), heart broken, on seeing the (vast) sea.

"He thinks, on account of the high speed during the flight of Ravana under the  pressure of his arms, the noble, largeeyed lady might have given up her life.

"Surely, she might have fallen into the sea while wriggling in her effort to extricate herself from the hold of Ravana as he was flying over the sea.

"Oh poor Sita, distanced from relations, while protecting her chastity helplessly she might have been devoured by cruel Ravana.

"Or else, the pious, blackeyed Sita might have been eaten by the the cruelnatured wives of the lord of demons.

"Or, she might have attained death, meditating on Rama, whose face resembles the fullmoon and eyes the lotus petals.

"Or, Vaidehi, the princess of Mithila might have cast off her life grieving intensely and crying, 'Alas, Rama, alas, Lakshmana, alas, Ayodhya'. (Mithila is the name of the capital city and Videha is the country which was ruled by Janaka. Sita, the princess is known as Vaidehi, Mythili and Janaki).

"Or, I think Sita might have been imprisoned in a cage like a myna in Ravana's palace. She will be surely crying.

"How could Janaki, the daughter of Janaka, Rama's wife, the lady with a beautiful waist and eyes like lotus petals, come under the fold of Ravana?

"Whether Janaki is lost or irretrievable or dead is not known The news should not be reported to Rama, who is very fond of his wife.

"To carry or not to carry this news to Rama would be a mistake. What shall I do? I am facing a tough situation.

"I wonder what the right course of action is when things have taken such a turn? What is proper for me to do? Hanuman once again deliberated.

"If I return to Kishkinda without seeing Sita of what use is my effort? What have I accomplished? What will happen? (Dharma, Artha, Kama and Moksha are the four Purusharthas or accomplishments in life)

"My crossing the ocean, my entry into Lanka and my survey of the demons are all futile.

"What will Sugriva or even the vanaras and the two sons of Dasaratha say when I reach Kishkinda?

"If I report the most unpleasant news that Sita was not found, Rama will give up his life.



"Seeing Rama in such a painful state, wise Lakshmana who has given his life to Rama, to whom he is deeply devoted will also not survive.

"On hearing the death of both the brothers Bharata will also die. On seeing this Satrughna will also not live.



"On seeing that Rama has ended his life, the grateful and truthful monkey leader,  Sugriva will give up his life.

"Distressed, disheartened, pained and grieved on account of her husband's death, the virtuous lady Ruma (wife of Sugriva) will be unhappy and die.

"Tara who is troubled by Vali's death and tortured with grief will not live when king Sugriva dies.

"On account of his parents death and also because of Sugriva's calamity, Angada will give up his life.

"The grief due to the death of their king will make the vanaras hit their heads with their palms and fists.

"The vanaras who were reared by the king's kind words, gifts and care will give up their life.

"The chiefs among vanaras together will not enjoy their life in the forest or mountains or caves.

"Tormented by their king's death the vanaras with their wives, sons and ministers will drop down from the mountain peaks on the rough ground and die.

"The vanaras will put an end to their lives by poisoning or by hanging or by selfimmolation or by killing themselves with weapons or by fasting unto death.

"If I go there (without finding Sita), it will cause destruction of the Ikshvakus and vanaras would weep. It would be dreadful.

"I will not go to the city of Kishkinda from here or to Sugriva without finding Mythili. It will not be possible for me to face him.

Both the highsouled warrior princes treading a righteous path as well as the vanaras will survive with a hope of my return if I stay back.

"If Janaki is not found I will stay here and live like a hermit subsisting on whatever is available on this sea shore, which has abundance of roots, fruits and water.

"I will prepare a pyre and enter the fire so that sea waves wash off the ashes or crows and beasts will eat up my body while i sit fasting unto death.

"I shall enter water and drown myself to death if I am not able to find Janaki. I think this way of ending life has been suggested by great ascetics.

My glory which had a good start (in the form of bringing Rama to Sugriva) and brought fortune to Sugriva and fame to me has been snapped as I could not find Sita.

"I will remain an ascetic and do penance under the tree practising selfcontrol and not go back without seeing the blackeyed Sita.

"Besides, if I go back without finding Sita all the vanaras including Angada will die.

"If I commit suicide, I will earn numerous sins. By being alive, I can witness auspicious events. Therefore, I will live, for, happiness can come only to the living.

The elephant among monkeys (Hanuman) worrying over and over again, holding his head for long could not reach the end of his grief.

"I will kill Ravana, this mighty, tenheaded demon. Sita was indeed carried away by him. This (killing him) can be a fitting reply to his evil action. My desire would be fulfilled.

"Or else, I shall carry him across the sea and put him before Rama like a bull as if he is a sacrificial prey to lord Siva."

Distressed over his inability to find Sita, Hanuman's mind was overcome with anxiety and he started thinking further.

"Till I find the virtuous Sita, wife of Rama in this Lanka, I shall keep searching everywhere again and again.

"Had I brought Raghava following the words of Sampati, Rama would have burnt all vanaras unable to find his wife.

"I will stay here itself, restricting my food and controlling my senses. Let not men and monkeys perish for my fault.

"Here is the Ashoka grove with huge trees. I will go there. I have not looked for her in this place.

"I shall offer salutations to Vasus, Rudras Adityas and Aswinis and proceed to increase (cause) the sorrow of the demons. (There are eight Vasus, eleven Rudras, twelve Adityas, two Ashwins and fortynine Windgods).

"I will conquer all the ogres and pass them to Sita, the delight of the Ikshvaku family as an offering and give Rama to her as the fruit of her austerities."

The brilliant son of the Windgod, Hanuman, whose senses were overwhelmed with worries, regained his senses in a short while and got up.

"My salutations to Lakshmana, Rama and divine daughter of Janaka. Salutations to Rudra, Indra, Yama and Vayu. Salutations to Sun, Moon and Maruts"

Having offered salutations to all gods as well as to Sugriva, he looked at all quarters and left for the Ashoka grove.

Hanuman started thinking again about his task after reaching the auspicious Ashoka grove.

'This Ashoka grove filled with many trees, guarded by many demons is carefully tended. It must be sacred.

"The guards posted there are surely protecting the grove. The divinity pervading all over me (the wind) must also have been controlled as it is also not blowing violently. I have turned my body small for Rama's cause and also to save myself from Ravana.

May all sages, gods, the selfborn Brahma, Windgod, Indra, the wielder of thunderbolt whose name is invoked in sacrifices, Yama, who carries a rope, Varuna give success and Lord Siva help me. May the Sun, Moon, Aswinis Marutas assist me. May the gods of the quarters and the lord of all beings help me to succeed. May those whom I could not see also bring success to me.

'Oh when and how would I behold that beautiful noble lady of stainless character, with a Moonlike face, prominent nose, white teeth, pleasant smile and with eyes like lotus petals?

"How will I set my eyes on that gentle, frail and suffering thing now, who has been abducted by that mean, cruel sinner of dreadful look?"  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे त्रयोदशस्सर्गः।  Thus ends the thirteenth sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.