Mighty Hanuman lost in thought for a moment, jumped down (the harem) to the boundary wall of the palace.

Standing on the boundary wall, the great vanara contracted his body and observed the blossoms on several tree tops---- Salas, lovely Ashoka trees and blossoms of champak, uddalaka, naga, mangoes with their fruits crimson as the snout of a monkey, it being the beginning of Spring.

He penetrated like an arrow released from a bow the cluster of trees covering mango grove and overgrown with hundreds of creepers.

Entering deep into the grove, Hanuman saw clusters of trees pleasing to look at, herds of animals and flocks of colourful birds singing melodious notes.The grove was surrounded on all sides by silvery and golden trees which looked colourful with flocks of birds and herds of deer. It was full of lovely thickets looking like the rising sun. It was fringed with various trees bearing abundance of fruits and flowers. It was inhabited by intoxicated cuckoos, bees, proud peacocks and numerous lovely birds.

The vanara who went searching for the paragon of virtue born of a noble family, awakened the birds who were happily asleep in their nests.

As the birds flew away, the trees hit by the wings of birds showered flowers of different colours.

Covered with flowers, Hanuman shone like a mountain of flowers in the midst of Ashoka grove.

﻿  Beholding that sprightly monkey running in all directions, its body covered with variegated blossoms fallen from the trees, all living beings there thought that it was Spring personified

﻿  Strewn with flowers of various colours fallen from the trees of various kinds, the goddess of earth looked charming like a young woman profusely bedecked.

﻿  Shaken vigorously by Hanuman of great speed, the trees shed their blooms of variegated colours.

The tree tops, shorn of their leaves and flowers and fruits fallen, appeared like gamblers who had lost their stakes and had to lay down their clothes and ornaments.

Shaken by the swift Hanuman, even the big trees dropped flowers, fruits and leaves.

Deserted by the flocks of birds resting on them (flowers and leaves also dropped from branches), the trees were left bare with trunks unable to move.

The garden of Ashoka with trees shattered and crushed by Hanuman's tail, hands and feet, appeared like a woman with dishevelled hair, with her vermilion mark effaced, her bright teeth and lips faded for being kissed and wounded with nails and bitten with teeth (by her lover).

Hanuman shook with tremendous speed the huge clusters of creepers hanging there just like stormy wind in rainy season scatters masses of clouds on the Vindhya mountain.

Roaming there the monkey noticed the beautiful floors paved with gems, gold and silver৷৷

﻿  He observed ponds of different shapes filled with clear water with steps paved with rich gems, with sands of pearls and corals and bottoms of crystal, which contained beds of lotuses in bloom, adorned with chakravaka birds and resonant with cacklings of swans and sarasas and vatyuhas rubbing their beaks. There were golden platforms built on banks and platforms built of crystals. There were trees on the bank of streams, and nectarlike sacred waters flowing in them surrounded by hundreds of creepers, and Ashoka blossoms scattered everywhere, with thickly grown bushes of different kinds, with lilies in bloom in tanks.

He observed ponds of different shapes filled with clear water with steps paved with rich gems, with sands of pearls and corals and bottoms of crystal, which contained beds of lotuses in bloom, adorned with chakravaka birds and resonant with cacklings of swans and sarasas and vatyuhas rubbing their beaks. There were golden platforms built on banks and platforms built of crystals. There were trees on the bank of streams, and nectarlike sacred waters flowing in them surrounded by hundreds of creepers, and Ashoka blossoms scattered everywhere, with thickly grown bushes of different kinds, with lilies in bloom in tanks.

The tiger among monkeys beheld a delightingful mountain, resembling the raincloud with tall, pleasing peaks, wonderful peaks spread all over the mountain. There were caves built of stone, with a variety of trees.

Hanuman, the great monkey saw a stream descending from the hill which looked like a beloved jumping down from the thighs of her lover. It was adorned with trees whose boughs touched the water and thus looking like an angry woman leaving her dear lover but detained by her relatives. With the water running backward in circles it appeared as if the beloved has returned to her lover pleased.

Not far from there, Hanuman, son of the Windgod sighted lotus ponds filled with different kinds of water birds.

Hanuman saw an oblong pond, full of cool water provided with steps, embellished with gems and beautified with pearl dust as sand on its bank. Thronged with many kinds of animals, it looked colourful with large mansions constructed by Visvakarma in the artificial woodlands decorated all over.

There the trees had abundance of flowers and fruits. A few trees were full of leaves and branches spread like parasols. There were raised golden platforms.

The monkey leader saw one simsupa tree covered all over with canopies of many climbers and leaves. The tree was surrounded by golden platforms.

He beheld several pieces of land and streams flowing out of the springs. He also noticed golden trees asresplendent as fire.

He saw trees resplendent with golden radiance and thought that he was in the midst of gold like the Sungod getting golden hue by the radiance of Meru, the golden mountain.

Hanuman was wonderstruck to hear the sound produced by rows of golden trees which stood round the simsupa tree. This sound resembled the tinkling of a hundred anklets when the wind passed through (their leaves).

Strongarmed Hanuman climbed up the simsupa tree shining with flowers on its top and surrounded by tender sprouts and leaves. (He said to himself)ः

"I may see by chance( from this point) Vaidehi tormented with grief anxiously waiting to see Rama while moving about here and there casually.

"Surely this beautiful Ashoka grove with delightful champak, chandan and bakula trees belongs to the wicked Ravana."

"This lovely lotuspond is frequented by flocks of aquatic birds. Surely Rama's queen Janaki will come to this place.

"Beautiful Janaki, beloved queen of Rama loves to wander in forests. She will surely visit this grove.

"Or may be that doeeyed noble lady brooding over Rama will come to this garden she is familiar with.

"That lovelyeyed queen tormented with grief over separation from Rama will be coming here to stay as she always loves strolling in the forest.

"The daughter of Janaka, the chaste wife of Rama, used to for the company of those creatures wandering in the forest.

Surely that lady of lovely complexion, the beautiful Janaki will come to this river  flowing with sacred waters for performing the evening rituals.

To the auspicious Sita,the beloved of Rama, the lord of the world, this Ashoka grove is a befitting place.

"The moonfaced queen will certainly come to this stream of auspicious water if she is surviving."

Pondering thus, the highsouled Hanuman remained concealed on the tree loaded with flowers and leaves and waited, looking eagerly for the wife of the lord of the people.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे चतुर्दशस्सर्गः।  Thus ends the fourteenth sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.