Hanuman looked out from the simsupa tree all around for Mythili scanning the ground below.

Hanuman surveyed from the Simsupa tree the Ashoka grove of trees full of fine fragrance. It looked welldecorated like the Nandana garden of Indra. It teemed with animals and birds. It was filled with the voices of the cuckoos. It had tall mansions and underground chamber. There were golden lilies and lotuses in the lakes, enchanting couches with rich coverings and trees full of blossoms of all seasons and fruits in abundance With the Ashoka tree shedding showers of flowers from time to time the place shone with the splendour of Sunrise. It glittered like inflamed fire. The Ashoka tree had hundreds of colourful birds on the branches. It appeared as if it had branches without leaves which made them look like earornaments (of the grove). Ashoka flowers in bloom hung down to the base of the tree as if to take away the grief of the onlookers. The blossoms of the Karnikara and kimsuka brightened the whole  grove.

The grove shone bright as if it were inflamed fire with beautiful trees like purnaga, saptaparna, champak and uddalaka in full bloom.

There were thousands of ashoka trees some of which shone like gold, others like the flames of fire and some dark as collyrium.

The grove with different types of gardens spread over looked like the Nandana garden of Indra and Chaitraratha garden of Kubera. It surpassed every other garden. It was unimaginable in splendour. It was divine and delightful filled with the radiance of countless varieties of blossoms shining like stars, like a second firmament. It was like another ocean filled with precious gems of flowers. It had trees with flowers of honeyscented fragrance. Sounds of animals and birds filled the air. It was pleasing to the heart with various divine fragrances wafted (by the breeze)৷৷

The monkey leader saw a lofty templelike structure in the midst of the Ashoka grove which was highly fragrant and appeared like another indescribable structure that stood on a thousand pillars like another Gandhamadana mountain. It gleamed white like mount Kailasa. Its stairs were paved with corals. The altars were made of brightly polished gold. This structure glowing with brilliance was as if stealing the eyes. It looked white with light and lofty as though scratching the sky.

Then he beheld a lady surrounded by female demons. Clad in soiled clothes she looked dejected, emaciated through fasting and was sighing repeatedly. She appeared thin and pale like the crescent Moon at the beginning of the bright fortnight.

Her form was faintly recognisable. She had a lovely radiance on account of her beautiful form. She looked like the tip of burning fire engulfed in a cloud of smoke.

She was wearing an excellent single yellow cloth which was soiled. Unadorned, she looked like a muddy lotuspond bereft of lotuses.

She was bashful, tormented with agony, dejected with a withered look. She appeared like the star Rohini oppressed by planet Mars.

Her face was filled with tears. She looked dejected and emaciated due to fasting. Always plunged in grief, she looked like one meditating in tears.

Unable to see her dear kith and kin, she sat guarded by ogresses. She appeared like a doe separated from the herd and encircled by a pack of hounds.

She (from behind) appeared like the earth covered with a range of trees at the end of rainy season with her single long black braid touching her hips looking like a black serpent. She who deserved to be happy and had not experienced worries was burning in grief. (एकवेणी is a trait of a प्रोषितभर्तृका Sita who was forced to stay in Lanka was a प्रोषितभर्तृका नायिका.)

After seeing the largeeyed lady worn out and dressed in soiled clothes, Hanuman started deliberating in himself and guessed it was Sita for strong reasons.

Beholding the form of the largeeyed lady, Hanuman guessed, 'This is similar to the form seen while the demon was kidnapping her'.

Her face resembled the fullmoon which dispelled the encircling gloom by its radiance. She had a slender waist, beautiful round breasts, shapely eyebrows, red lips, dark hair, and eyes like lotus petals with attractive limbs. She was comparable to Rati, consort of Cupid.

Just as the radiance of the full moon is cherished by all, this lady was liked by every one in this world. With her lovely figure she was seated on the ground like an austere ascetic.

The timid lady was hissing (sighing) like the consort of the serpent king, who being caught in a widespread cobweb of grief was looking gloomy.

She was like the flames of fire obscured by smoke. She appeared like the text of Smriti of doubtful meaning, a treasure that has been thrown away

She was like faith shattered, hope frustrated, desires blocked by obstacles, success vitiated, fame marred and intellect blurred.

She appeared like fame besmirched by false allegation. She was pained by the obstruction to meet Rama and emaciated by abduction.

The fawneyed lady was looking here and there with her dark, curved eyelashes. Her unhappy face was streaming with tears.

Covered with dirt and mud and shorn of adornments even though she deserved them, she looked wretched like the radiance of the Moon muffled by dark clouds.

Hanuman did recognise Sita after looking at her carefully again and again even as one is able to make out knowledge of shastriclore forgotten with lapse of time and lack of practice.

Just as an unclear expression which has undergone certain changes in meaning due to lack of usage over a long period is understood by virtue of previous practice so also Hanuman had difficulty in recognising Sita who was devoid of any decoration.

After close observation of different signs and deliberation with reasons he came to the conclusion that the largeeyed lady is the same blameless princess Sita.

Hanuman observed the ornaments worn by Vaidehi adding grace to her limbs which Rama had described.They were wellcrafted earrings and wellfit Savdamshtras. He  noticed wonderful, variegated ornaments of corals and gems as well as those worn on hands. They were blackened for long wear and Sita had marks of wearing them on her body.  (Noteः This is a pair ornaments shaped like dog's teeth. It is not known on which part of the body they were worn).

"I think these ornaments are the same that were described by Rama. Those dropped (by Sita) are not found on her body. These were not dropped.There is no doubt."

"The shining yellow upper garment like a golden cloth was torn. Flung down, it stuck to a tree which the monkeys noticed.

"The jingling, choice ornaments were thrown down on the ground.

"This cloth worn long is crumpled. Even then it has retained its shine and looks fresh.

"This lady of golden complexion is Rama's beloved queen who does not disappear from his mind, although away.

"She is that same lady for whom Rama has been passing through compassion, benevolence, grief and passion. He is compassionate considering her a woman, kind and benevolent since she is his dependent, stricken with grief for losing a wife and passionate since she is his beloved.

"This blackeyed Sita and her divine, charming body with perfect limbs are a match for Rama's figure.

"The divine queen's mind is firmly fixed on Rama and his mind, fixed on her. For this reason she and the righteous self (Rama) are able to survive till this moment.

"Lord Rama had accomplished a difficult task in sustaining the body this way without allowing it to sink and perish during separation from her.

"Rama, the strongarmed hero has accomplished a difficult task by surviving even for a moment without this Sita who has intoxicating lustre".

On seeing Sita, the son of the Windgod, felt glad at heart and mentally reached Rama the lord of the world. Hanuman was full of praise for Rama.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे पञ्चदशस्सर्गः।  Thus ends the fifteenth sarga in Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.