On hearing the demon's haughty words, oppressed, pitiable Sita replied slowly in a sorrowful tone.

Sita, austere, beautiful and chaste afflicted by grief kept sobbing. Brooding over her husband and trembling in fear, she placed a blade of grass in between her and Ravana and replied with a gentle smile on her face.

"Turn your mind away from me and fix it on your wives. You should not expect to seek me just as a sinner cannot hope to seek blessedness.

"I was born of high lineage and joined a meritorious family by virtue of my marriage. I am devoted only to my husband. I should not commit this contemptible, forbidden act."

Glorious Vaidehi having thus spoken to the demon turned her back and continuedः

"I cannot be your lawful wife obtainable by your personal efforts. I am a chaste woman married to another man. (Being a king) examine the dharma honestly and adopt a pious way of life.

"O nightranger Enjoy your wives. Take care of them. Taking your example, others' wives also deserve to be protected.

"The wives of others will insult an evilminded man who is not satisfied with his own wives, is fickleminded and has no control over his senses.

"Are there no pious men around or are you not heeding their words? Your mind is perverted and inclined to commit a forbidden act.

"You are indulging in unrighteous act and not listening to the advice of wise men who have a sense of discrimination. You are the cause of the destruction of demons.

"Even prosperous countries and cities are destroyed on account of indiscreet rulers engaged in unfair means.

"Having got you as its ruler, this Lanka filled with gems (riches) will perish without  delay for the crime of one individual.

"O Ravana living beings will welcome and enjoy the destruction of a shortsighted sinner killed by his own vile act.

"Seeing you, getting ruined this way for your sin, those who were angry with you for their humiliation in your hands will feel glad and say 'Luckily this terrible fellow has met with his doom' .

"I cannot be lured by your power or wealth. I am inseparable from Raghava like light from the Sun.

"How can I pillow on somebody's arm after resting on the honourable arm of the great lord of the worlds ?

"I am alone the lawful wife of the lord of the earth like the knowledge of the Vedas which rightfully belongs to a wise brahmin who has realised the self after having had his ceremonial bath (as a token of celibacy) and having observed strict vows during the period of his study.

"O Ravana it is proper for you to unite me in distress with Rama as one would unite a female elephant with the lordly elephant from which it is separated in the wilderness.

"I wish you to build friendship with Rama, the bull among men. Surely it is the right thing for you to do, if you are desirous of avoiding a dreadful death.

"He is famous as a knower of dharma and is compassionate to those who seek his protection. If you desire to preserve your life build friendship with him.

"Propitiate him. He is compassionate to those who seek refuge. Exercise control over your senses for your sake and it is proper for you to return me to him.

"It is good for you to give me back to Rama, the foremost in the Raghu dynasty. Otherwise you will face death.

"A thunderbolt may spare its target, Yama, lord of death may spare for a long time the life of a person doomed. But Rama, the lord of the world, will not spare any one when enraged.

"You will hear the terrible twang of Rama's bow resembling the rumble of the thunderbolt released by Indra who performed a hundred yajnas.

"Arrows marked with Rama and Lakshmana will soon rain on Lanka like the poisonous snakes with flaming fangs.

"The shafts bound with feathers of Kanka birds (released by Rama and Lakshmana) will be killing the demons all over this Lanka. They will not give a chance for any other weapon to fall.

"Just as Garuda swiftly extirpates the serpents, Rama will exterminate the demon leaders.

"My husband, the subduer of enemies, will soon take me away just as Lord Visnu in the form of Vamana took away the glowing prosperity from the demons with three strides.

"When the army of demons as killed you had no capacity to protect and was destroyed at Janasthana, the place of death. You acted in this dishonest way.

"You are a mean creature. Finding me in the vacant hut, when the two brothers, lions among men, were away, you abducted me.

"Had you smelt the presence of Rama and Lakshmna, it would not have been possible for you to stand there, like a dog under the gaze of a pair of tigers.

"You will not be able to withstand them in a battle. You will meet the same fate as the onearmed Vritra in a battle with the twoarmed Indra.

"My lord Rama accompanied by Saumitri will draw out your life by his arrows swiftly as Aditya sucks up shallow water at once by his radiance.

"Even if you fly to Kubera's mountain (Kailasa) or the residence of king Varuna (ocean) you will not escape Rama's arrows like a mighty tree cannot evade lightning.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे एकविंशस्सर्गः।  Thus ends the twentyfirst sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.