Hanuman, son of the Windgod whose face shone like coral, dressed in a sober manner climbed down the tree, went close to Sita, offered salutations with his palms on his head and spoke in sweet wordsः

"O blameless lady with eyes like lotus petals, in crumpled silk, holding a branch, and standing, who are you?

"Why are tears of grief flowing from your eyes like water trickling down a pair of petals of white lotuses?

"O noble lady, are you a goddess or a demoness, a naga, a gandharva, a rakshasa, a yaksha or a kinnera?

"O beautiful lady Do you belong to the race of Rudras, or Marutas, or Vasus?. O noble lady, you appear a goddess to me.

"are you Rohini, embellished with best virtues among the constellations? Have you come down from the abode of the luminaries separated from the Moon, her lord?

"O lady of lovely black eyes who are you? Have you by any chance offended your husband out of anger or out of delusion? Are you the auspicious Arundhati dislodged for making your lord Vasistha angry?

"O woman of beautiful waist from which world have you come here? For whom are you worrying? Who is your son, father, brother or husband? Are you worrying about some one dead?.

"From your weeping, your sighing and your touching the earth (gods do not touch the earth) and your signs of sovereignty, I do not think you are a goddess (meaning otherwise she posessed divine grace).

"On the basis of your royal signs and other qualities I infer that you are the daughter of a king or his consort.

"If you are Sita, who was forcefully borne away by Ravana from Janasthana you may kindly reveal to me freely. May god bless you.

"Indeed your plight, the superhuman beauty and your robes marked with asceticism, surely tell me that you are Rama's queen."

Happy to have heard words of praise of Rama, Vaidehi spoke this to Hanuman, who got up the treeः

"I am daughterinlaw of king Dasaratha, knower of the self, the foremost among kings on earth and a slayer of enemy army.

"I am daughter of the great soul, Janaka, king of Videha, known as Sita. I am the wife of that sagacious Rama.

"I enjoyed worldly pleasures in abundance for twelve years at Rama's abode.

"Then in the thirteenth year king Dasaratha along with the royal preceptor arranged to coronate Rama, delight of the Ikshvaku family, in the kingdom.

"While preparations for the coronation were on, queen Kaikeyi said to her husbandः

'I shall not drink or eat food, if Rama is coronated. I shall end my life this moment.

'O Dasaratha, the foremost among kings if the promise lovingly made by you earlier is not going to be false, Rama should go to the forest'.

"Remembering the boons the ever truthful king had granted to Kaikeyi, he fainted after hearing her cruel and harsh words.

"The aged king who held on to truthfulness and righteousness begged his famed eldest son Rama to return the kingdom.

"The illustrious Rama who valued his father's word more than sovereignty, bowed to the command of the father.

"Rama, whose strength was his truthfulness, gave whatever others sought but would not accept anything in return. He would not speak a harsh word.

"Having given up the kingdom voluntarily, Rama, a highly renowned king cast off his luxurious upper garments and asked me to take care of his mother.

"I, however resolved to live in the forest, marched ahead of him quickly as I did not prefer even heaven without him.



"Respecting the king's order and determined firmly, we entered the impenetrable forest.

"While the most valiant Rama was living in the Dandaka forest, I, his wife was borne away by the evilminded Ravana.

"He has allowed me two months time to live. After two months I will have to give up my life."  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे त्रयस्त्रिंशस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the thirtythird sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.