Hearing the words of Sita who was overwhelmed with grief, the monkey leader Hanuman felt sad and thus spoke comforting herः

"By the command of Rama I am here as a messenger. He is keeping well. He is well and wishes you well.

"O godlike lady Rama, son of Dasaratha, master of the Vedas, wielder of Brahmastra wishes you well.

"The mighty Lakshmana too, a dear brother and follower of your husband is immersed in grief, and sends salutations to you."

On hearing the wellbeing of Rama and Lakshman, lions among men, Sita experienced thrill all over her body. She then spoke to Hanumanः

"The adage that 'joy comes to a living being even though it be at the end of a hundred years' is popular. It appears true in my case".

Hanuman thus created a sense of wonderful joy in her as they came together. Both of them started to converse restoring confidence in each other.

Hearing the reply of Sita, who was crying piteously, stricken with grief, the monkey leader, Hanuman moved close to her.

As Hanuman started slowly drawing close, Sita suspected he might be Ravana.

"Ohshame on me. I have told him my story which should not have been said. This is verily Ravana come in a disguise".

So saying Sita of flawless limbs, emaciated with grief, left the branch of Ashoka tree held by her and squatted on the ground.

The longarmed Hanuman saw Sita, who was stricken with grief and deluded with fear. He prostrated to her. But out of fear she did not look at him.

On seeing the vanara prostrated, the moonfaced lady, sighed deeply and spoke to him in a sweet voiceः

"If you are that trickster Ravana who appears incognito before me, it is not good for you. You are causing grief again.

"You are the same Ravana who took the guise of a mendicant, giving up your real form and came to Janasthana.

"Oh you are one who can assume any form at will. You are a nightstalker. It is not good for you to cause pain to me who is already emaciated through fasting, who is pitiable and who is already afflicted.

"May be my suspicion is not correct Because I am experiencing pleasure in my mind in your presence.

"O great vanara, If on the other hand you have come here as Rama's messenger I wish you well. I love Rama's story. Tell me.

"O vanara Rama's virtues are dear to me to hear. O gentle one just as the current of the river wears away its banks, my mind is lured by your presence.

"Oh I have been seeing the person sent by Rama in my dream for a long time. This is a pleasant dream to me.

"Even if I can see the heroic Rama together with Lakshmana in my dream my pain will be gone. Even the dream is inimical to me (I cannot sleep and thus cannot dream.)

"I do not think it is a dream. Pleasure cannot be experienced by seeing a vanara in a dream. I experience pleasure now (seeing a monkey in a dream is a bad omen).

"Can this be a delusion of my mind or a mental imbalance (resulting in movement of the mind in the body). Is it a malady born of my madness? Or is it a mirage?

"No, this cannot be insanity. nor even delusion. But I recognise this vanara well"

Considering the strength and weakness of demons in that manner Sita thought that Hanuman was none other than the king of demons who can asume any form at will.

Having entertained such thoughts, Sita, the lady with a fairwaist, daughter of Janaka, did not respond to the vanara.

Hanuman, son of the Windgod understood what was going on in Sita's mind and spoke pleasing words that brought joy in her.

"Rama is glorious as the Sun, brings delight to the whole world like the Moon, is the  king of kings like Vaisravana, and renowned like Visnu endowed with valour.

"He is truthful in speech like Brihaspati, prosperous (like Kubera), sweettongued, handsome, graceful like Kamadeva.

"He shows anger to one who deserves it, he is the foremost charioteer of the world and he is a great self under the shadow of whose shoulders the whole world takes refuge.

"You will see the consequences of the action of Ravana who abducted you deceitfully in the form of deer when Rama was away from the hermitage.

"Heroic Rama will soon release many scorching, fiery arrows in anger and kill Ravana. I seek your permission as an envoy of Rama. Filled with grief by your separation, he has made inquiries about your welfare.

"The brilliant, longarmed Lakshmana, delight of Sumitra enquires about your welfare and offers salutations to you.

"O goddess like lady Rama's friend Sugriva, king of vanara chieftans inquires about your wellbeing.

"O Vaidehi Rama, Lakshmana and Sugriva always remember you. Luckily you are alive even though you are under the clutches of shedemons.

"Very soon you will see mighty Rama, Lakshmana and Sugriva of unlimited prowess surrounded by crores of vanaras.

"I am Sugriva's minister known as Hanuman, a vanara who entered the city of Lanka after leaping over the great ocean.

"Setting my foot with my valour on the head of the cruelminded Ravana, using my valour, I came here to see you.

"O goddesslike lady I am not a deceitful person as you suppose me to be. Shake off your suspicion as I speak to you and trust me."  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे चतुस्त्रिंशस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the thirtyfourth sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.