Mighty Hanuman, the son of the Windgod again spoke to Sita humbly to inspire confidence in her.

"O noble lady I am a vanara, an envoy of learned Rama. You see this ring with Rama's name inscribed on it, O godlike lady

"Be calm. Be blessed. Your sorrows have come to an end. This (the ring) is given by the great self, Rama, to make you trust me.

She received the ornament that adorned her husband's hand and gazed at it and felt delighted as though her husband had arrived.

Her beautiful countenance with large white eyes with a reddish tinge in the corners shone like the Moon released from Rahu.

Young Sita felt delighted about her husband's news and blushed. By praising him for his action, she pleased the great monkey.

"O foremost among the vanaras you have trespassed the abodes of demons all alone. You are mighty and capable and wise.

"You with your admirable prowess have reduced this ocean which is an abode of crocodiles stretching over a hundred yojanas to a cow's hoof mark.

"I do not think you are an ordinary monkey. You have no fear or excitement about Ravana. You are a bull among vanaras.

"O best of monkeys As you have been sent by Rama, the knower of the self, it is proper for me to converse with you.

"The formidable Rama will not send any one specially to me without testing him or knowing his valour.

"To my luck, righteous Rama who abides in truth and glorious Lakshmana who enhances the joy of Sumitra are keeping well.

"Indeed if Kakutstha is well wherefore does he not burn the oceangirdled earth in his rage as (the earth is burnt) at the time of dissolution of the era?

"Both of them are capable of subduing even the gods. I think the reversal of my fate is reason for their inaction.

"Is Rama the greatest among men not depressed? Does he not feel helpless? He is (perhaps) taking necessary steps (for my recovery).

"I suppose prince Rama is not too depressed or perplexed to attend to his work. He will (perhaps) be doing the duties expected of a manly person.

"Tell me if Rama, scorcher of enemies, desirous of victory is following a two- fold policy (confrontation and conciliation) A tough enemy cannot be defeated by following this method. A three-fold strategy has to be adopted in this case (confrontation, conciliation and creation of dissension among his foes) to be victorious. I hope he is well-disposed to his friends and has a good team!

"I hope he is making new friends, who desire his friendship. Hopefully, Rama is well honoured by his allies.

"Does the prince ever seek the blessings of gods or fall back upon personal effort as well as providence?

"I hope Rama is not devoid of love towards me by my separation. O Vanara, hope he will liberate me from this misery.

"I hope Rama who deserves happiness and not suffering has not become depressed now , having experienced a spate of sorrows.

"I hope he regularly receives news about the welfare of Kausalya, Sumitra and Bharata.

"I hope respectable Rama is not too absentminded for being immersed in sorrow on my account. Hope he will save me.

"Will Bharata, the devoted brother, send his formidable army of one akshavhini protected by ministers for my cause? I trust he will. (Akshauhini 109350 foot soldiers 65610 horse soldiers 21860 elephants soldiers on chariot)

"I trust that the illustrious Sugriva surrounded by valiant vanaras who use their teeth and nails as weapons will reach this place.

"Hope heroic Lakshmana, enhancer of the joy of Sumitra, who has mastered the use of weapons will blow away the demons through a network of arrows.

"Can I hope to see Ravana and his relatives slain in the battle by fiery weapons in a short time?

"Hope, Rama's moonlike face without me with its golden complexion and lotus fragrance must not have been pale and withered with tears like the lotus in a pond scorched by the heat.

"Rama has given up sovereignty for the sake of establishing righteousness and led me into the forest on foot.He had not then felt any fear, anxiety or grief at heart.Rama showed patience, instead. Hope he retains them.

"His love for me is superior to his love for his father, mother or any one else. O messenger, I wish to survive till I hear any news from my dear lord."

The godlike lady, having spoken to the vanara leader in a very meaningful and sweet manner about her beloved Rama, she remained silent, waiting to hear Hanuman's  attractive words of description of Rama once again.

Having heard Sita, Hanuman endowed with fearsome power placed his folded hands on his head and said thisः

"O lotuseyed one Rama knows not that you are here. Therefore he has not taken you away immediately as did Indra to rescue his wife Sachi.

"As soon as he hears your words from me, Rama will reach (here), leading a huge army of powerful troops of _vanaras_ and bears.

"Kakutstha Rama will still the imperturbable abode of Varuna (ocean) by the torrent of his arrows and rid the city of Lanka of all the demons.

"Thereafter, whoever comes Rama's way, be it gods or demons or even death or any one else he will destroy them.

"O noble lady not being able to see you, Rama is immersed in an ocean of sorrow, he has no solace like an elephant tormented by a lion.

"O Sita I swear in the name of mountains like Malaya, Vindhya, Meru, and Dardura (the abodes of monkeys and bears) and by the roots and fruits as well (which are the food of vanaras). you will soon behold Rama with beautiful eyes, red lips like bimba fruit, lovely earrings and a countenance resembling the full moon.

"O Vaidehi, you will soon see Rama seated on the Prasravana mountain just as Indra (who performed a hundred sacrifices) seated on the back of the king of elephants.

"Rama is not eating meat, nor drinking wine. He takes only the one fifth of a meal  (sanctioned for an ascetic) available in the forest.

"Since you left, Rama has been always thinking sincerely of you, no longer drives away flies or mosquitoes nor insects or serpents from his body (his mind entirely fixed on you).

"Rama is always lost in thought. He is totally given to grief. Absorbed in love for you, he thinks of none else৷৷

"Rama, the best of men never goes to sleep and even if he drops off to sleep he mutters 'Sita, Sita' in a sweet voice in his sleep.

"Sighing deeply whenever Rama sees a fruit or a flower or any such delightful thing, he remembers you and calls you out again and again, saying, 'alas, my darling '

"O divine lady prince Rama is ceaselessly suffering. He keeps talking to you in air. The determined Rama is only thinking of your recovery ".

Her sorrow was mitigated by references made by Hanuman about Rama.She felt equally sad when she heard about Rama's agony. The princess from Videha appeared like a night at the advent of autumn, with the Moon looking partly muffled by clouds and partly bright.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे षट्त्रिंशस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the thirtysixth sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.