To the righteous words (about Rama's grief) of Hanuman, Sita with a face like the full moon replied.

"O vanara you have told me that Rama has his mind always fixed on me, not on others and you have also said that he is sad. It is like offering me poison mixed with nectar.

"Death snatches a man tied with a cord, whether he is rolling in luxury or sinking in adversity.

"O best of vanaras surely it is not possible for living beings to overcome destiny. You see how Sri Rama, Saumitri, and my own self are all afflicted with grief.

"When will Raghava reach the shore of this ocean of grief? He is like a man who has suffered a ship wreck, trying to swim?

"When will my husband see me after killing the demons including Ravana and uprooting Lanka?

"One year's time has been given (by Ravana) to me. Rama should be informed to be quick in reaching before the completion of the time limit and that I will survive till then only.

"O vanara this is the end of the tenth month. Only two more months are left. This is the condition laid by the wicked Ravana in my case.

"Vibhisana made efforts to advise Ravana for my restoration. But Ravana has not agreed to that.

"Ravana did not like to return me having fallen into the death trap. Death lies in wait for him in battle.

"O vanara Nala the eldest daughter of Vibhisana sent by her mother came here personally and reported this to me.

"O eminent vanara no doubt my lord will soon reach this place. My pure conscience tells me that Rama has many virtues.

"O vanara Rama is endowed with perseverance, manliness, prowess, kindness, gratitude, competence and power.

"At Janasthana without the help of his brother also he slew fourteen thousand demons. Which enemy will not tremble before him?

"O bull among men he will not be shaken by calamities. Just as Sachi, the daughter of Puloma knows Indra's might I know Rama's.

"O monkey the valiant Rama is like the Sungod shoofing a dazzling volley of arrows which will dry up the sea of enemy forces."

While Sita, tormented with grief on account of Rama was thus speaking, her eyes filled with tears, the monkey saidः

"On hearing me Rama will reach soon with a huge army of vanaras and bears.

"O beautiful lady, if you please, I shall redeem you today itself from grief. You may ride on my back, O blameless lady.

"Placing you on my back I shall cross the ocean. Indeed, I have the capacity to carry the entire city of Lanka along with Ravana.

"O Mythili Just as oblations offered to the sacred fire goes to Indra, I shall offer you today to Rama waiting on the Prasravana mountain.

"O Vaidehi you will see Rama and Lakshmana making all out efforts like Lord Visnu to kill the demons.

Mighty Rama staying in asram ill be enthused to see you seated on my back like Lord Purandara (Indra) seated on the back of the lord of elephants (Airavata)

"O god like lady climb up my back. Do not be reluctant. Join Rama just as Rohini unites with the Moon, O beautiful one

"Climb on my back and cross the ocean through space in the flaming light, conversing with Moon and Sun.

"O beautiful lady it is not possible for all the inhabitants of Lanka together to follow me while I carry you from this place.

"O Vaidehi just as I reached here I shall beyond doubt take you on my back in the same way across the sky without any difficulty. See.

When Mythili heard the wonderful proposal from Hanuman, the best of vanaras, she experienced immense joy in every limb of her body and saidः

"Hanuman how do you intend to carry me to such a distant place? Indeed, it is your monkey nature, I suppose.

"O bull among monkeys you have such a small body. How can you intend to carry me from here to my husband, the lord of men"?

On hearing Sita's new belittling statement about him, Hanuman, the illustrious son of the Windgod reflectedः

'Blackeyed Sita is not aware of my strength or my power. Therefore let her see the real (huge) form that I can assume at my free will'.

Thinking thus, Hanuman, the noble monkey, crusher of enemies, started revealing his real form to Vaidehi.

The wise bull among monkeys, jumped down from the tree and started growing in size in order to instil confidence in Sita.

Hanuman, the foremost of the vanaras resembling mount Meru or Mandara stood there glowing like blazing fire in front of Sita.

Resembling a mountain in size, with a red face, with teeth and nails strong like diamond, the vanara in dreadful form said to Vaidehiः

"I have the capacity to carry away this entire Lanka uprooted with its mountains, gardens, forts, ramparts and gateways along with the king.

"O queen it is enough. Give up this unworthy attitude. Be stable. O Vaidehi, rid Lakshmana and Rama of grief".

Seeing the son of Maruta in dreadful form, the broad lotus petaleyed daughter of Janaka with eyes as large as lotus petals replied ः

"O great monkey I have understood your strength and power. Your speed is like the Windgod's and your power is astonishing and splendid.

"O chief of vanaras how could an ordinary person be capable of reaching this land on far off shore of the immeasurable ocean?

"I know you are capable of carrying me on your journey. I am sure about the quick success of your mission which has been carried out after careful planning.

"O sinless and foremost monkey going with you is not proper for me. Your windlike speed will render me unconscious.

"When you fly over the ocean in the sky speedily I may tumble down from your back by your speed out of fear.



"O destroyer of foes, it is not possible for me to go with you. Further, when you are burdened with a woman you will also fall into danger (because of me), no doubt.

"When I am seen (while being carried away) by the demons of fearsome valour they will pursue you, ordered by the wicked Ravana.

"O heroic monkey as the warriors armed with spears and maces surround you and attack, your life will be in danger, because of me.

"The demons are in large number and they will be armed with weapons. You are unarmed. How can you fight and protect me?

"O noble monkey while you are engaged in fighting with those demons of wicked deeds, I may drop down out of fear.

"O noble monkey the massive, fearsome and powerful demons may defeat you in the fight in any way.

"Or else, while you are engaged in fighting and turn your attention the other way I might fall down and the sinful ogres may bear me away.

"They may snatch me away from your hands or cut me to pieces. Success or defeat is uncertain in a war.

"In such a case, caught and intimidated by the demons I may die. Then your efforts will be wasted.

"It may be that you can kill all the demons but by such an act the fame of Rama will be diminished. (He cannot give his strength a trial)

"Or else, the ogres will carry me and conceal me in a secret place which the vanaras or Rama and Lakshmana may not know.

"All your effort for my sake would be futile. Hence Rama's arrival along with you will be of great benefit.

"O strongarmed Hanuman your life and the life of the great self Rama, of his brother, and relatives of your king is dependent upon my survival.

"Both Rama and Lakshmana who are emaciated with sorrow and suffering on account of me will give up their lives along with vanaras and bears.

"O chief of vanaras I cherish my devotion towards Rama alone and not touch the body of any other man.

"I had no control over myself. I was helpless and my husband was not present when I had to bear the touch of Ravana's limbs. What can I do?

"It will be proper if Rama comes here, kills Ravana along with all his relations and takes me away.

"I have seen and heard about Rama's conquest of enemies and his valiant deeds in war. Indeed, gods gandharvas, nagas or even demons cannot match him in war.

"After seeing Rama who is equal to lord Indra in valour. He is like blazing fire whipped by wind, wielding a wonderful bow, who can withstand the power of strong Rama accompanied by Lakshmana in war?

"O chief of vanaras who can withstand Rama accompanied by Lakshmana, the conqueror of enemies? His arrows resemble the rays of the Sun at the time of the deluge, steady like the elephants who support the quarters of the earth.

"O foremost of the vanaras get Rama here along with Lakshmana and the lord of vanara troops quickly. O chief of vanaras this way you can bring happiness to one like me who is emaciated with suffering on account of Rama.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे सप्तत्रिंशस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the thirtyseventh sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.