Satisfied with the words of Sita, the tiger among monkeys, who was eloquent in speech saidः

"O queen O lady of auspicious appearance your words are most appropriate to and characteristic of a modest virtuous woman.

"It may not be possible for a woman to cross on my back the vast ocean stretching over a hundred yojanas. It is not possible for a woman.

"O humble lady the second reason given by you, 'I ought not to touch a person other than Rama' is well said and worthy of you, being the wife of the great soul. Who else can speak such words?

"O queen Kakutstha Rama will hear from me fully all that has been said and done by you in my presence without any omission.

"O queen my heart is drenched with love for Rama and desires to please him for many reasons. Therefore these words have been spoken by me.

"Crossing the ocean and entering Lanka are difficult. But I accomplished it. Hence my proposal.

"I offered to take you today itself out of my love and devotion to Rama with a desire to unite you with him and not with any other intention.

"O blameless lady If you wish not to accompany me you may give me a token of identification to let Rama know about my coming here and seeing you".

Having heard Hanuman, Sita, a child of god, said these words in a low tone. Choked with tears, 'Carry this token of identity to my dear husband'ः

'Long ago we were staying at Siddhasrama. This hermitage was situated to the northeast at the foot of Chitrakuta mountain which was not far from the river Mandakini. It had abundant roots, fruits and water. You sported with me in the gardens which were fragrant with many types of flowers and ponds. You sat down on my lap with wet clothes in the hermitage'.

'Then a crow greedy of flesh began to peck my bossom with its beak. I took a clod of earth and warded him off.

'The crow was an eater of offerings, hungry for food began to peck me again and again for flesh.He did not stop.

'My upper cloth was slipping. I was trying to pull up my waist string angrily when you saw me.

'Then you made fun of me, and I became angry. I was abashed. Torn by the voracious bird I sought your shelter.

'Exhausted, I sat on your lap again. Seeing my angry face you pacified me. You were happy (to see me draw close).

'O lord when I was angered by the crow and my face was filled with tears, you marked me wiping my eyes.

'Totally exhausted I slept on your lap for a long time, and in turn you slept on my lap later.

'The crow came back again and clawed me in the space between my breasts even after I woke up after slumber from Rama's lap. Flying, it tore my bosom again and again.

'At the touch of the drops of blood dripping from my body, tormented by seeing me distressed with the dripping blood, you were awakened, you who were an illustrious scorcher of foes.

'O strongarmed Rama, seeing my torn breasts, you became angry like a hissing serpent and hissing said ः

'O Sita with a beautiful lap like an elephant trunk by whom is your bosom wounded? Who is sporting with an angry fivehooded snake?

'Then looking around, you saw the crow facing me with sharp, bloodstained claws.

'This crow was the best of birds. He was surely Indra's son who had covered a long distance with great speed and his speed was like the Windgod's.

'Then you, the strongarmed and best among the wise, your eyeballs rolling in fury, made up your mind about the cruel crow.

'Taking out a blade of darbha grass from your mat, you invoked the weapon of Brahma by reciting the mantra. Then you discharged it which blazed like the fire of death and went spearheading towards the crow.

'Then you threw the burning darbha grass at the crow and it chased him in the sky.

'Then that crow flew to many places seeking asylum all over the universe chased by the blade of grass.

'Then the crow went round all the three worlds, having been rejected by his father Indra, including all the sages and gods. Refused by all he came back to Rama seeking shelter.

'Seeing the crow fallen on the ground, O Kakutstha, you who are a saviour of those who seek refuge saved him out of compassion, even though he deserved to be killed.

'Rama, you saw the crow in pain and despondency who returned to you and said that it is not possible to make Brahma's weapon ineffectual.You may tell now. (what should be done.)

'Then that crow said, 'let my right eye be blinded'. you then hit the right eye of the crow'. Thus the crow offered his right eye and saved himself.

'That crow offered salutations to you Rama and king Dasaratha, thereafter took permission and went to his own dwelling.

'(Addressing Rama as though he was present before her, Sita said) 'O lord of the earth for my sake you released the weapon of Brahma on a crow. What makes you excuse him who has abducted me?

'O bull among men you are so loving to me. I am like an orphan. Be kind to me. She who has found her lord in you stays without a protector.

'O my supreme lord I know you are kind, righteous, valiant, vigroous, mighty. You are boundless, calm and deep like the ocean. You are lord of earth and the seas and compeer of Vasava. I have heard from you that motiveless compassion is the best way to make one righteous.

'Even though you are an expert in the use of weapons, truthful and strong. (Yet) why  are you not using weapons aganst the demons?'

(Now Sita turns to Hanuman and says) "In war serpents, gandharvas, demons or Marutas cannot withstand the speed of Rama's arrows and hit back.

"Does Rama have a little anxiety about me? If he has, why does he, a disciplined hero, not put an end to the demons with his sharp arrows?

"Or, why does the mighty hero, Lakshmana, who is a scorcher of enemies, not come to my rescue taking the orders from his brother?

"Both Rama and Lakshmana are tigers among men who resemble wind and fire in power and have the unassailability of the gods. Wherefore are they disregarding me?.

"Perhaps I must have committed an atrocious sin. There is no doubt. For although both of them are scorchers of enemies, they deliver me not."

Hearing the piteous words of Vaidehi and beholding her eyes filled with tears, the Windgod's son, lustrous Hanuman replied thusः.

"O godlike lady Rama is not averse to your misery. On my word this is true. Rama is immersed in sorrow. Even Lakshmana wails.

"I could find you with difficulty. This is not the time to wail. O blameless lady take it, your sorrow has come to an end at this moment.

"Both the mighty brothers, tigers among men, are eager to see you. Both the princes will reduce this Lanka into ashes.

"O largeeyed lady cruel Ravana along with his relatives will be killed by Rama in war and Rama will return to his city with you.

"Communicate your message to mighty Rama and Lakshamana, to brilliant Sugriva and even the vanaras who gather there.

"Hanuman having spoken this way, Sita, resembling a god's daughter, grieving, thus addressed Hanumanः

"Bow to Rama and offer salutations on my behalf. Inquiries concerning his welfare should be addressed to Rama, whom virtuous Kausalya bore as a son.



"Great, righteous Lakshmana had given up his pleasures and followed his brother Rama in his favour into the forest to be able to serve him.

"Lakshmana, who has lionshoulders and strong arms, who is handsome, who takes Rama as his father and treats me as his own mother.

"Heroic Lakshmana, did not know while I was borne away. He is prosperous, foremost in serving elders. He is energetic and reserved in his speech like my fatherinlaw. He is a prince dear (to his brother).

"Rama's brother Lakshmana is always dear to me. Heroic Lakshmana will discharge whichever responsibility is entrusted to him.

"He is Lakshmana for whose care and support Rama did not miss the noble king Dasaratha (during exile). Convey him my words of enquiry about his wellbeing.

"Lakshmana is soft, pure, competent and dear to Rama. O great vanara, act in such a manner that Lakshmana can mitigate my suffering. O great monkey, the best of vanaras you are competent in accomplishing this task.

"By your efforts alone my husband will try for my release. You may tell these words to my heroic husband, Rama, again and again.

"I will hold on to life only for a month. Beyond, I will not survive. I swear by truth. You may tell this to Rama.

"O heroic Rama just as Kausik was rescued from the underworld it behoves you to deliver me from imprisonment of wicked Ravana".

Then Sita took out the exquisite and auspicious Chudamani worn on the head, untied from her clothes and gave it to Hanuman to be presented to Rama.

Then Hanuman, taking the extraordinary jewel and placed it on his finger as it was not fitting to his arm.

Having recieved the jewel from Sita and circumambulated her, Hanuman offered salutations to her and stood by her.

Hanuman stood there physically, with great joy gazing at Sita, but mentally he was with Rama.

Having received the most precious jewel from the daughter of Janaka, Hanuman prepared to return like a mountain released from the impact of the wind.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे अष्टत्रिंशस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the thirtyeighth sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.