Sita gave the jewel to Hanuman and said, "This signet ornament is known to Rama very well".

"Seeing this jewel,Rama will recall three of us, my mother, myself and the king Dasaratha" (as this was given by her mother at her marriage.)

"Great Hanuman you are enthused now. You may think over the future course of action.

"O best of monkeys it is your responsibility to carry out this task. O Hanuman think carefully of that. Take the initiative to reduce my suffering. I am confident that you can do it."

Hanuman possessed with fierce valour said to Vaidehi, 'so be it' and bowed his head, and offered salutations before he departed.

The noble lady, Sita, having been fully convinced about Hanuman and realising that he is about to start, her voice was choked with tears. She said these wordsः

"O Hanuman the great communicate my welfare to both Rama and Lakshmana, to Sugriva, his ministers, elderly vanaras in righteous order.

"You must pacify the strongarmed Rama in a manner by which he will help me to cross the ocean of grief and rlieve me.

"Let the illustrious Rama take me alive. Help me with your (persuasive) words and you will acquire merit.

"On hearing your ever spirited words his manliness to get me back will be charged.



"Having heard Sita's words, Hanuman, son of Maruta, placed his folded palms over his head in reverence and repliedः

"Kakutstha Rama, accompanied by vanaras and bears will reach here soon and conquer the enemies in war and relieve your grief.

"I do not see any one among humans or demons or even among gods who can face his arrows when released.

"Indeed, Rama is capable of conquering even the Sungod, or the raingod or Yama (the son of the Sun) specially for your sake.

"Rama is fit to rule the entire earth surrounded by the ocean. O delight of Janaka he will succeed in serving your cause."

On hearing the truthful, proper, pleasing words by Hanuman whom she held in great esteem, Sita said thisः

Sita again and again looked at Hanuman who was about to start. She made him understand her words conveying her love for Rama.

"O destroyer of enemies if you think of halting for a day you may do so in a solitary location and leave tomorrow.

"Your presence will relieve me of my suffering, if you stay here for a while.

"O tiger among vanaras if you leave this place to come again, my life will be uncertain, (if your coming is uncertain). There is no doubt about it.

"My agony would be increased further by not seeing you. It would be inflamming my agony and I would be even more pained.

"O heroic chief of vanaras I am doubtful as to whether vanaras and bears can extend help?

"How can the army of vanaras and bears, for that matter, princes Rama and Lakshmana negotiate the ocean, which is difficult to cross?

"It is only three beings who have the capacity to leap over this ocean. Garuda, or you or the Windgod.

"What means do you, being the foremost hero among the three who are capable performing this difficult task, foresee?

"O slayer of enemy heroes if you alone can accomplish this task the fame of doing this will be yours.

"It would be worthy of Rama if he with his entire army emerges victorious over Ravana  in a battle and takes me to his city.

"If Kakutstha (Rama), slayer of the enemy army fills the entire Lanka with his arrows and takes me, then his action will be worthy of him.

"You may make arrangement in such a manner that, that great self, the hero in war makes his victorious march which is worthy of him."

Having heard the meaningful, courteous and logical words of Sita, Hanuman repliedः

"O Devi the lord of monkeys, Sugriva heads the army of vanaras and bears. He is richly endowed with satvaguna and is determined to accomplish your cause and free you from sorrow.

"O Vaidehi Sugriva will reach this place with thousands of crores of vanaras very soon and would kill all the ogres.

"Valiant, virtuous and powerful vanaras who can leap with the speed of mind are awaiting orders (of Sugriva).

"Their course cannot be impeded either upward, or downward or right or left. They are indeed very brilliant and would never fail in any task.

"They have often circumambulated the earth including its oceans and mountains through the aerial path with great enthusiasm.

"The vanaras under Sugriva who move in the forest are more powerful than me or equal to me. None is inferior to me.

"If I have managed to come here, why not the other powerful ones? The superior leaders are not sent (as messengers). Only ordinary ones like me are.

"O noble lady therefore, give up your agony. Enough of your lamentation. The monkey troops will reach this place in one stride.

"Both the valiant Rama and Lakshmana, lions among men, looking brilliant like Sun and Moon will come to you riding on my back.

"Both the heroes, Rama and Lakshmana will come and blow up the city of Lanka with their unfailing arrows.

"O beautiful lady Raghava, the delight of the Raghu race would kill Ravana and his kins and return with you to his city৷৷

"Therefore, count the days and rest assured. Let it be auspicious to you. You will shortly see Rama burning like fire.

"When Ravana is slain, with his sons, ministers and kith and kin, you will reunite with  Rama as Rohini unites with the Moon.

"O queen Mythili you come to the end of your sorrow and will soon see Ravana killed by Rama".

Having thus consoled Vaidehi, Hanuman, son of the Windgod resolved to depart. Once again he spoke to Vadehiः

"Very soon you would see the slayer of foes, who is an accomplished wielder of the bow (Rama) along with Lakshmana at the entrance of Lanka.

"You will soon see heroic vanaras whose weapons are their teeth, who are like lion and tiger in their valour. They are (mighty) like wellbred elephants.

"O respectable lady you would see many troops of vanara chiefs who resemble clouds hovering on the mountain peaks of Lankaroaring.

"Rama is tormented by the dreadful arrows of the god of love pierced into vitals, like an elephant hit by a lion. He has no happiness in life.

"O devi weep no more.Entertain no unpleasant thoughts.You have a great husband, just as Sachi has her lord Indra.

"Who is superior to Rama? Who is equal to Lakshmana? Both the brothers are like Fire and Wind. They are your refuge.

"O noble lady You will not stay longer in this country, which is a strong hold of hosts of demons and a dreadful place It will not be very long before you unite with your beloved. Pray, have patience till then.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे एकोनचत्वारिंशस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the thirtyninth sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.