Hearing the great vanara's speech, Ravana overwhelmed with anger ordered the execution of Hanuman.

Vibhishana did not approve of the killing of Hanuman, who had declared that he was an envoy (of Sri Rama) when the wicked Ravana ordered his murder.

Vibhishana who stood by the right course of action, having realised that the lord of demons was angry pondered over his duty.

Then Vibhishana, who was skilled in speech having decided about his duty addressed his reverential elder brother, a conqueror of enemies in soothing, words in a meaningful, wholesome manner.

"O king of ogres give up your wrath, forgive and calm down. Please listen to my appeal. You know the basic values of life. Virtuous rulers of the earth do not order killing of an envoy.

"Mighty king killing this Hanuman is contrary to righteousness of kings. This is deplorable diplomacy and also unbecoming of you.

"You are conversant with dharma of a king. You have a sense of gratitude. You are a knower of right and wrong of all beings. the supeme truth.

"If wise persons like you are also overpowered by unjust anger, then the mastery of the scriptures will become a mere fruitless exercise.

"O destroyer of foes, O unassailable king of demon calm down. Only after carefully considering what is proper and improper decide on the punishment to be imposed".

Ravana, the lord of demons heard Vibhishana's words and overcome with anger repliedः

"O slayer of foes it is not wrong to kill a sinner. I shall, therefore, kill the sinful vanara."

On hearing his brother's harsh words spoken in tremendous anger, which were not acceptable to noble souls, wise Vibhishana again spoke these words of supreme truthः

"O lord of Lanka O king of demons be pleased to listen to my words which are the essence of dharma and artha. The elders have declared that the emissaries should not be killed by any means.

This enemy has done a lot of harm, no doubt. Indeed he has done terrible and unpleasant deeds. (Yet) the wise have recommended many alternate punishments, while prohibiting their killing.

"Mutilation of limbs, flogging, shaving of the head, and deforming limbs etc. these punishments have been prescribed for an emissary. Never has killing of an emissary been heard.

"You are wellversed in dharma and artha. Learned men first decide what is right or wrong (before imposing punishment). How are you swayed by unjust anger? Indeed courageous persons (like you) should control anger.

"Heroic Ravana there is hardly any one who is equal to you in the knowledge of dharma, in the practice of worldly affairs and in grasping subtle truths of sastras. Indeed you are supreme among suras and asuras.

"You are the king of demons. Hosts of gods and daityas efficient in wars are conquered by you again and again since you are a brave warrior invincible to gods and demons.

"I do not see any use in killing this monkey. Pronounce punishment on those who have sent this vanara.

"Whether he is soft or harsh, he has been sent by others. He is speaking on other's behalf and is dependent on them. An emissary does not deserve to be killed.

"O king If he is killed, I do not see any one who can cross this great ocean and come by air to reach this place.

"You who can conquer citadels of enemies should not direct your efforts to kill an envoy.You are fit to make efforts against enemies like gods including Indra.

"O lover of war if Hanuman is slain I do not see any one who can incite those two illmannered sons of the king who are prevented from reaching this faroff land.

"O delighter of demons even the gods and demons who are endowed with valour and energy cannot win you. You are invincible. It is not proper for you to lose chances of a good war.

"You have with you wellwishers, courageous ones, who have good qualities born in a good race, who are noble, sensible people, wielders of weapons and wellpaid warriors in crores.

By your order let some strong soldiers from one contingency go and capture the two sons of the king, to exhibit your power over the enemy.

The mighty chief among the demon kings, a king of the nightroamers and the enemy of gods accepted the words of advice of his younger brother Vibhishana.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे द्विपञ्चाशस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the fiftysecond sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.