Hanuman leaped ike the Windgod, unwearied across the sky, as a huge boat crosses an ocean. The ocean was graced with a swan, the sky with constellation of Swati with fullblown lotuses and water lilies, like the nagas, yakshas, and gandharvas gathered together. The Moon in the sky was like a white lotus, the Sun like a waterfowl, the  auspicious Tishya and Shravana like the sweetvoiced swans, and the clouds like duckweeds and green grassy spots on the shore. The Punarvasu star was like a large fish and the planet Mars was like a crocodile. Airavata was like the great island. The waves produced by the wind were like cool moonlight in the cold water.

Great Hanuman, son of the Windgod, flew through the abode of the Windgod as if he was swallowing the space, scratching the Moon, lord of the stars, as if seizing the heavens along with the constellation of Sun and stars and as though he was drawing the clusters of clouds.

(In contact with Hanuman) the clouds shone forth brilliantly in white and black, in blue and yellow and in greenish red colour.

With his exist and entrances into the mass of clouds, his appearances and disappearances among the clouds, he looked like the Moon.

Passing through the clouds, appearing and disappearing, the heroic Hanuman clad in white was like the Moon in the white sky.

As he made his way through flakes of clouds, again and again appearing and disappearing, Hanuman the delight of the Windgod shone in the sky roaring like a thundering cloud. He looked like Garuda.

The glorious Hanuman, having killed eminent ogres and thereby making himself widely known, having caused havoc to the city of Lanka and terrific sorrow to Ravana by tormenting the army, offered salutations to Vaidehi from midocean and continued his journey.

The valiant Hanuman touched the lord of mountains fondly and went with great speed just as an arrow released from the centre of a powerful bowstring.

The chief of the monkeys arrived near, and beholding the face of the Mahendra mountain, which resembled a mass of clouds, thundered.

The thundering noise of Hanuman filled all the ten directions with great sound.

Having sighted the place of his companions and waiting to see them for long that tiger among monkeys made a loud noise and shook his tail in joy.

By the terrific sounds made by Hanuman in joy, it seemed as though the pathway of Garuda, the sky along with the Sun's orbit was splitting.

Thereafter the brave and powerful monkeys waiting on the northern shore of the ocean for the arrival of the son of the Windgod, heard the roar and thundering sound of the stormy cloud produced by the sweeping motion of Hanuman's thighs propelled by the speed of his movement.

All the vanaras who were feeling dejected and waiting anxiously heard the noise of Hanuman that sounded like a thundering cloud.

On hearing the loud voice of Hanuman, all the vanaras were longing to see their friend.

Jambavan the chief of vanaras became very happy at heart and called all the vanaras and spokeः

"Oh Hanuman is always successful. If he has not, he would not make sounds in this manner".

Hearing the sound of his dashing movements of arms and thighs the vanaras jumped  about in joy, then and there.

The vanaras were very happy. Longing to see Hanuman, they jumped from one tree top to another and from one peak of a mountain to the other.

Waiting for Hanuman, the vanaras jumped from the tree tops holding the branches. They shook the branches just like clothes to welcome friends.

Hanuman, the powerful son of the Windgod roared like the wind captured in a mountain cave would.

(On seeing) Hanuman, who was resembling a heavy cloud approaching, the vanaras stood with folded hands.

Thereafter the vanara, who resembled a mountain, descended with great speed on the summit of mount Mahendra full of trees.

Overwhelmed with immeasurable joy, Hanuman descended from the sky like the mountain with its wings cut off and dropped on the bank of a mountain stream.

Feeling very happy at heart all the vanara leaders gathered around Hanuman. They stood motionless with extreme happiness.

The vanaras were filled with joy seeing Hanuman who returned unhurt. They offered roots and fruits to him. Hanuman on his part offered salutations to the foremost of the monkeys.

The great Hanuman also offered salutations to elders, preceptors such as Jambavan and other leaders. He also saluted the young Angada.

The valiant Hanuman worthy of worship having been honoured by both Jambavan and Angada was pleased. He responded briefly, saying 'Saw Sita'.

Then holding the hand of Vali's son he sat down at a beautiful location of the garden of mountain Mahendra.

Hanuman felt happy and told Angada, the bull of vanaras, "I saw Sita in the groves of Ashoka guarded by dreadful ogres. She is blameless, eager to see Rama. She is wearing a single braid of hair. She is young and emaciated due to fasting. Her hair is matted and soiled".

Then hearing Hanuman's meaningful and nectarlike words all the vanaras rejoiced.

Some powerful vanaras howled, some chattered, some roared and some screamed, going round and round and others echoed the sounds.

Some elephantlike vanaras who were excited and felt overjoyed lifted their long and beautiful tails and hit them on the ground.

A few vanaras jumped down from the mountain top and hugged the elephantlike Hanuman.

And hearing Hanuman's sweetest words, Angada addressed the heroic vanaras

"O vanara you have leaped such a wide ocean and have returned. In strength and valour. There is none equal to you.

"O your devotion to the king, O your valour, fortitude and courage is admirable. You could see Rama's wife, an illustrious lady. This is a matter of our good luck. Rama will (now) shed the sorrow due to separation from Sita.

Then the vanaras went round all the three Angada, Hanuman and Jambavan. Out of joy they lay down on the huge rocks.

All the vanaras longing to listen to Hanuman about his crossing the ocean, seeing Lanka, Sita and Ravana kept looking at the face of Hanuman.

Surrounded by many great vanaras, Angada was shining like Indra, lord of the gods attended by the gods in heaven.

The mountain peak graced by famous Hanuman and renowned Angada bedecked with armlets seated on top joyfully, appeared prosperous and splendid.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे सप्तपञ्चाशस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the fiftyseventh sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.