Then the mighty Hanuman and other vanaras having assembled on the summit of mountain Mahendra and felt vey much happy.

Thereafter, very delighted Jambavan inquired Hanuman most affectionately of all that happened.

"How did you find the godlike lady? How was she? How was the tenheaded one, cruel in action, behaving with her? You may narrate what she said.

"O Hanuman, tell us in detail the entire thing. On hearing it, we will think about the next course of action.

"You are wise and you should tell us in detail what is to be told and what has to be hidden when we report."

Having been asked (by Jambavan and others) Hanuman with horripilations all over his  body, bowed down and saluted in the direction of queen Sita and beganः

"I rose upwards leaping into the sky, intent on reaching the southern shore from the mountain Mahendra.It has been witnessed directly by all of you.

"Even as I was leaping I saw a terrific and wonderful golden peak which came as if to obstruct me on my path.

"The mountain stood on my way turning towards me in order to obstruct me. Then I resolved in my mind that this great, wonderful, golden mountain has to be smashed.

"Hit by my tail the great mountain peak, which was radiating like the Sun was shattered into a thousand pieces.

"Perceiving that I am going to smash him he spoke to me in a sweet tone delighting my heart, addressing me like a son.

'Know me to be a friend of windgod and so I am like your father's brother. I am dwelling in this great ocean and known as Mainaka.

'O son in the past, foremost of the mountains too had wings and they used to range at will all over the earth tormenting all.

'Mahendra, the killer of ogre Paka, heard the story (of the cruel deeds) of mountains and cut off their wings into a thousand pieces with his thunderbolt.

'O son I was saved from Indra by your kind father Maruta who dropped me in this great ocean.

'O subduer of enemiesI must make efforts to help Rama the foremost among the righteous, for I have received help (from your father) who is equal to Indra in valour'.

"When I heard Mainaka, I told him about my intention to go up. That great self Mainaka allowed me.

"Then the huge mountain in human form concealed as huge mountains remain hidden in the ocean.

"Then with great speed I proceeded on my path. It took a long time to cross the ocean.

"I saw Surasa, the mother of serpents in the midst of the ocean and she saidः

'O powerful monkey you are destined to be my food provided by the immortals. Therefore, I will eat you as I have I found you after a long time. (of unsatiated hunger).'

"When addressed thus by Surasa, I bowed low with joined palms, stood before her with my face turned pale, and saidः

'Dasaratha's son, the illustrious Rama, a scorcher of enemies, accompanied by his brother Lakshmana and wife Sita entered Dandaka forest.

'His wife was abducted by the evilminded Ravana. By Rama's command I am going to meet her as messenger from Rama.'

"I told her that it is proper for her (living in the domain of Rama) to help his queen and wife. Or else, I promised after I disclose to Rama, Sita's whereabouts, I will come and enter her mouth.



"When Surasa said this I who was ten yojanas in height increased by fifteen yojanas.

"She too opened her mouth wide enough for my size. Seeing her distending her mouth, in a moment I became small equal to the size of thumb and came out.

"Then Surasa assumed her natural form again in a moment and said this to meः

'O noble vanara O foremost of the vanaras go and accomplish the task.Unite the great Rama with Vaidehi.O strongarmed vanara, be happy. I am pleased with you'.

"Then all creatures praised me saying 'well done well done'. Then I leaped into the vast sky like Garuda.

"Then I was captured by a shadow of some one. I could not see and I reduced my speed and looked around in all the ten directions. I could not see the one who seized me.



"Thinking so I looked down into the water and there I saw a terrific shedemon.

"She was frightening and laughed in loud voice without any hesitation. Steadfast she uttered these ominous words to meः

'O huge monkey where are you going? I am hungry since long. I am going without food and must eat you. Make me satisfied'.

"I said 'well' and enlarged my body more than her mouth could hold.

"She opened her huge mouth to eat me as she did not know that I had already assumed a huge ugly form on my own.

"In a moment I reduced from a huge form to a small one, entered her heart and sprang into the sky.

"She who resembled a mountain fell into the ocean with her arms hanging down when I pulled out her heart.

"I heard the charanas and siddhas residing in the sky talking to each other that the fierce ogres Simhika has been killed by Hanuman in a moment.

"Having slained Simhika, I thought of the huge feat that I have done. I remembered the big mission before me and went to the southern shore of the ocean and saw Lanka full of trees.





"Then the frightening form, with its hair burning like sacrificial fire, emerged to kill me. I defeated her hittting with my left fist and entered the city at sunset time.

'O hero I am the presiding deity of Lanka whom you have won by your valour. Therefore you will win many demons she foretold.

"There when I went to the harem of Ravana and searched all night, I did not find the fairwaisted Janaka's daughter.

"Not able to find Sita at the residence of Ravana I was immersed in an ocean of endless sorrow and did not know what to do.

"While worrying like that I saw a long golden boundary wall surrounding a splendid home garden. (upabana)

"I crossed that boundary wall and saw many kinds of trees and in the midst of that Ashoka garden, a huge Simsupa tree. I ascended it and saw rows of banana plants.

"Not far from the Simsupa tree I saw beautiful Sita, of dark complexion, with eyes like lotus petals, whose face was emaciated due to fasting, wearing only a single sari (the same one since her abduction) her locks filled with dust, pathetic looking, immersed in sorrow, meditating on her husband seated like a doe encircled by tigresses, surrounded by ugly and cruel shedemons fed on flesh and blood.



"I remained there looking on that renowned wife of Rama from the Simsupa tree.

"Then I heard a deep sound mixed with jingling golden girdles and anklets coming from Ravana's residence.

"I was scared and contracted my body size and stood on the Simsupa tree like a bird in the sky.

"Then arrived the powerful Ravana with his consorts to that place where Sita was and stood there.

"On seeing Ravana, the king of demons, beautiful Sita, full of fear hid her face and plump breasts between her thighs.

"Sita was full of fear and worry, looked here and there without any protector to pacify. She was trembling in fear. To that Sita, the tenheaded Ravana bent his head down and said, 'trust me and respect me'.

'O Sita if in your pride, you do not respect me, I will see (drink) your blood in two months.

"Hearing the words of evilminded Ravana, Sita became very angry and spoke these approprate wordsः

'O lowly demon I am the wife of valiant Rama and daughterinlaw of Dasaratha, the king of Ikshvaku race. How is it your tongue that spoke unspeakable words has not fallen down?

'O ignoble one when my husband was away, you came and abducted me unseen by the great Rama. You do not have even a little courage (to win me through a straight fight).

'You are not equal to Rama and not even fit to be his servant. He does yagnas and always abides in truth. He is valiant in war.

"Thus addressed harshly by Janaki, the tenheaded Ravana blazed up in anger suddenly like the flame of the funeral pyre.

"Then the wicked Ravana raised his eyebrows and his right fist to strike at Sita and even the shedemon there raised their voice saying, ' alas, alas '

"Evilminded Ravana's wife Mandodari, a noble one among women came forward from the midst and prevented him.

"She spoke sweetly to Ravana, who was tormented by the god of love saying, 'For what purpose do you desire Sita? You are equal to Mahendra in might'.

'O lord you enjoy with the daughters of gods, gandharvas and even the young ladies of yakshas. Why do you need Sita?'

"Then all the women got together and stopped the mighty nightranger, Ravana and quickly took him back to his mansion.



"Janaki did not care for their words of threat, as though they were a blade of grass and of no use to her.

"Since the threatenings of the shedemons were of no use the ogresses who live on flesh and blood reported to Ravana about great Sita's formidable determination.

"Then all of them gave up hope of their efforts and scattered around her, succumbed to sleep.



"From the midst of all of them got up Trijata, saying, 'You eat me if you like. Know that Janaka's daughter is a chaste woman and is the daughterinlaw of Dasaratha. She cannot be destroyed'.

'Today I saw in my dream, a dreadful and horripilating scene of destruction of demons and even victory of Sita's husband.

'To protect the demon clan from destruction by Rama, it is enough if we beg her (pardon). Indeed, I think that way.

'Whoever in a sorrowful state sees such kind of dream, would be not only relieved of all sorrows but will experience immense happiness. Janaka's daughter Sita will bless us with protection if we pray her.

'On hearing the words (of Trijata) that 'Rama will succeed', young and bashful Sita felt happy and said that 'If it comes true I will protect thee'.

"Seeing Sita's deplorable state, her illluck and her dread, I began to worry and had no peace of mind.

"I thought of a strategy to enter into conversation with Janaki that is to praise the Ikshvaku race.

"The divine lady heard my enumeration, sanctifying the royal seers. She replied me, with her eyes blinded by tearsः

"O foremost of vanaras who are you? Why and how have you come here? How did you make friendship with Rama? Tell me all that in detail.

"Hearing her I also said, 'O queen Sugriva, the warrior of fierce valour and king of monkeys developed friendship with your husband'.

'I came here as a servant sent by your tireless husband to find you.

'O glorious lady the tiger among men, the illustrious son of Dasaratha himself sent this ring to you as a taken of identity.

'O venerable lady I seek your order. What should I do? Should I take you to Rama and Lakshmana? What do you say?

"Having heard all that (Hanuman said) Sita, the delight of Janaka thought over and said, 'Rama should kill Ravana and take me'.

"Then bowing down I saluted the noble and blameless queen Sita to give a signet, which would be very pleasing to Rama.

"Sita then said to me, 'Take this best of gems and present it to the longarmed Rama as a token'.

"Having said so, the noble lady delivered a wonderful jewel with supreme message to me in a sorrowful mood.

"Reminded by her again (that Rama should turn up soon to take her), I offered reverential salutations by circumambulating her.



'O heroic Hanuman narrate in such a way that by hearing you both Rama and Lakshmana will come here soon, accompanied by Sugriva.

'Otherwise with none to protect me, I will live only for two months.I will die like an orphan and he will not see me'.

"When I heard her pathetic appeal, I was overtaken by anger. I perceived the task left over for me to do.

"Thereafter, I increased my body to the size of a mountain, intent on fighting and started destroying the pleasure garden.

"Those uglyfaced ogresses woke up and saw the devastated garden and terrified beasts and birds.



'O powerful king an evilminded vanara has destroyed the inaccessible pleasure garden not knowing your valour.

'O king may orders be issued to kill this wickedminded vanara wandering aimlessly. He has done contrary to your interest.

"Ravana, lord of the demons having heard (the ogresses) sent invincible ogres called kinkaras who know his mind.

"I killed with an iron bar a battalion of eighty thousand demons who were guarding the garden with tridents and maces.

"Those who were left behind, the less powerful ones went and reported to Ravana that the great army has been killed.

"Then a thought struck my mind. I took hold of a pillar of the tall, decorated mansion of Lanka and killed with it all the hundred demons stationed there.



"With a dreadful iron bar I slayed Jambumali, who was endowed with mighty strength, and was an expert in war and other terrific ogres who accompanied him.

"Ravana, the demon king sent his mighty army of strong footsoldiers, the sons of ministers.

"I sent all of them to the abode of Yama with just an iron bar. Having heard about the death of the less powerful ones, Ravana sent five heroic army generals.

"Since I killed all of them along with the army, the tenheaded Ravana sent out his mighty son Aksha together with many demons.

"When Mandodari's son, an expert in war had risen up to the sky I caught his feet and whirled him round a hundred times and smashed him.

"When Aksha was done to death, the tenfaced Ravana was enraged and gave instruction to the second son, called Indrajit who was thirsting for war.

"When the army and even the Generals were done to death in combat I was very happy.

"Thinking that Indrajit will surely kill me, the strongarmed mighty Ravana again sent intoxicated demon warriors.

"Realising that I cannot be slain and that his (Indrajit's) power is reduced, he released Brahma's weapon on me with high speed and captured me.

"Then the demons bound me with ropes and brought me to Ravana.

"The wickedminded Ravana, then enquired me why I came to Lanka and why I killed the demons.

'I have done all this for the sake of Sita, O demon king I came to your mansion desiring to see Sita. I am the legitimate son of Windgod. My name is Hanuman.

'I am a vanara, a messenger of Rama and minister of Sugriva.You may know that I have come here to convey the message of Rama to you.

'Highly powerful Sugriva enquires your welfare. He sends beneficial advice to you for your righteousness, pleasures and wellbeing.

'While I was dwelling at the woodedmountain in Rshyamuka, a treaty of friendship was made with Rama, who is skilled in war.

'The king said, ' My wife was abducted by a demon. I request your help by all means to get her'.

'Sugriva told the story of Vali in turn and asked for his help and to make agreement to kill Vali.

With fire as witness the great lord, Rama along with Lakshmana made friendship with Sugriva whose kingdom had been usurped.

'In the combat Rama killed Vali with a single arrow and made Sugriva the king of vanaras.

'We too have to help him in this task. So a message is sent to you on righteous grounds.

'Before the heroic vanaras exterminate your entire army, return Sita at once to Rama.

'Who knows not the power of Vanaras in the past? Even gods had sought their help.

'This I was asked to tell you by the king of vanaras wishing your welfare'. 'Ravana then angrily looked at me as if to burn me.

"The evilminded demon, Ravana, who perpetrates dreadful acts ordered my slaughter, not knowing my power.

"Vibhisana, a very pious brother of the demon king, interceded on my behalf.

"Vibhishana, a tiger among demons, asked Ravana to give up his decision as it was a forbidden course according to the science of royal polity.

'The royal code prohibits the murder of an emissary. A wellwishing emissary should convey the truth.

'O Ravana of immeasurable courage even if the emissary has done any kind of harm he may be mutilated but not murdered. Nowhere do the sastras allow killing (of an ambassador).

'On hearing Vibhishana, Ravana instructed the demons to burn my tail.

"Having heard the king's words, all the demons collected and held my tail, wrapped it with saris of fibres and tattered rags of cotton.

"Many ferociously courageous demons got ready. They bound me and hit me with firesticks and fists. They fastened my tail with ropes and set in on fire.

"The brave demons took me round the city through the royal streets and announced loudly to let every one know that I am bound and that my tail has been set on fire.

"I reduced my form and rid of the bondage. Then again I assumed my original huge form and took up an iron bar lying near and killed all the demons (present).

"Then I leaped to the entrance gate of the city without being perplexed. With my burning tail I set fire to the boundaries and towering mansions which looked like the world at the end of dissolution.



"Lanka has been burnt by me and Sita might have also been burnt. There is no doubt. The great purpose of Rama has been spoilt by me'.

"Thus I was overtaken by sorrow and worry. Just then I heard the wonderful propitious utterances of charanas announcing that Sita was not burnt.

"It was amazing to hear the words of the charanas. On hearing that Jankai had not been burnt, I understood that it is on her account (that he is also not burnt although his tail was ignited.)

"My tail was burning but I was not burnt by fire. There was joy in my heart. The wind carried sweet fragrance.

"For these two auspicious signs and the highly propitious words uttered by the sages I felt glad at heart.



"Passing along the path of the Windgod, the Moon, the Sun, the siddhas and the gandharvas I came to see you.

"Everything was favourable to me by the power of Rama, by your goodwill and for the great purpose of Sugriva.

"Let all that could not be done there and still remains to be done, be accomplished by you. I have presented the entire thing".  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे अष्टपञ्चाशस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the fiftyeighth sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.