Hanuman, the foremost of the monkeys, bull among vanaras said, 'Enjoy the honey devoid of any fear. I shall prevent those who object to your action'.

Pleased with Hanuman's words, the distinguished Angada permitted the monkeys to drink.

Even if Hanuman, the achiever, forbids me to do something, I will do it. And now when he has permitted you, why hesitate ?

Having heard the words that came from Angada's mouth, the bulls among vanaras praised him for his generous approval.

The vanaras praised Angada, the bull among vanaras and went to Madhuvanam swiftly like a fastflowing river going to uproot a tree.

Overjoyed at the news of Mythili, being seen, the vanaras entered Madhuvanam and attacked the guards violently, drank the honey and ate the tasty fruits.

All the vanaras collected together, entered the Madhuvanam and attacked in many ways the guards protecting the garden.

All of them now gathered at one place and drank honey from large containers. Others were busy preventing the guards.

The honeycoloured monkeys drank honey. Some threw large chunks of honey combs after drinking and some went about intoxicated.

Some took branches of trees and rested at the root of trees. Some totally languid lay down spreading leaves due to drinking of sweet drinks.

Intoxicated with drink, some behaved like mad people, some pushed others senselessly and some were unsteady and shaky.

Some roared, some warbled happily, some felt drowsy, drinking honey and some  dropped off to sleep on the ground.

Some made others laugh, some provoked others and some thought of doing something else having got over the intoxication.

All the guards engaged in protecting the garden were driven away in all directions by the fierce vanaras.

Some were dragged on their knees and tossed up. Some monkeys exhibited their private parts, showing indecent behaviour. Dadhimukha, highly disturbed at this, saidः

Permitted by Hanuman (to enter Madhuvanam and drink), they dragged one another forcefully tossed up on their knees showing their private parts.

Then Dadhimukha, the guardian of the garden became furious on the vanaras. Having heard from the guards that the garden was destroyed, he said soothing words to them.

"Come, we will all go there to Madhuvanam and prevent forcibly the vanaras who have consumed honey proud of their power.

"The heroes, bulls among vanaras, heard Dadhimukha and quickly entered Madhuvanam along with him.

On the way, the energetic Dadhimukha took up a tree and ran to the leaping vanaras swiftly with guards following him.

The furious vanara guards lifted rocks, trees and even mountains and went behind Dadhimukha the elephant among the vanaras.

The heroic vanaras held Sala and Tala trees and rushed at once keeping their leader's words in mind.

Then the heroic guards in their thousands fell on the vanaras proud of their power on and under the tala trees.

Having seen the fury of Dadhimukha, Hanuman the leader of the vanaras went to him swiftly.

Seeing the revered, powerful and strongarmed Dadhimukha rushing to him, the angry Angada caught him with both hands tightly.

"Blinded by arrogance, the prince pushed him (Dadhimukha) on the floor forcibly, forgetting that he was his revered granduncle.

The heroic Dadhimukha, an elephant among monkeys, with his shoulders and arms broken, and body drenched in blood lost his consciousness instantly.

At once Dadhimukha, the maternal uncle of the king became conscious and chased with a stick the intoxicated vanaras.

Escaping from the vanaras with great difficulty, Dadhimukha, a bull among monkeys, repaired to a secluded place and said to his servantsः

"Let them stay here. Our broadnecked king Sugriva will be there with Rama. Let us go to him.



'Madhuvan has come down to us from our forefather's time. Dear to the king, its entry is prohibited even to the gods.

'Sugriva will chase all the vanaras and their friends greedy for honey. They will be punished with a stick. They are doomed'.

'Indeed those evilminded ones who have disobeyed the king's order deserve to be killed.That way our fury and forbearance will result in success'.

Powerful Dadhimukha having said that to the guardians of the garden rose up to the sky and went off with them.

In a moment, Dadhimukha reached the place where wise Sugriva, the son of Sungod was there

Seeing Rama, Lakshmana and also Sugriva from the sky he landed on an even ground.

Dadhimukha, a great hero and king of the guards protecting Madhuvanam surrounded by his servants, with a sad expression on his face offered painful obeisance with folded hands bowing down his forehead at the feet of Sugriva.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे द्विषष्टितमस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the sixtysecond sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.