Feeling anxious on seeing Dadhimukha touching his feet with his forehead, Sugriva, the bull among vanaras saidः

"O heroic Dadhimukha, get up. Tell me why you have fallen at my feet. I give you protection from all.

When great Sugriva gave assurance to wise Dadhimukha, he got up and saidः

"O king in your time or even before, during the time of Vali, that (Madhuvanam) was forbidden for entry. Now it has been laid waste by the trespassing vanaras.

"Even though the garden guards forcibly tried to prevent them they did not care and have devoured all the honey.

"Some have thrown off the leftovers, when others were prevented from drinking off the honey, they raised their eyebrows (to show their grouch).

"When the guards asked the vanaras to leave the garden the enraged vanaras misbehaved with them.

"O Sugriva the vanara guards were chased away by the many heroic monkeys, angry and redeyed.

"Some were struck with hands, some beaten on their knees and were dragged as they liked and showed up their private parts.

These heroes struck that way devoured the Madhuvanam on the earth at their will and devoured the honey even when you are there as king.

While Dadhimukha appealed thus to wise Sugriva, Lakshmana the killer of enemies happened to see them and enquiredः

"O king why has this protector of the garden come here? Why is he sad? What is he narrating, asked Lakshmana.

Great prince Lakshmana thus said, Sugriva the proficient speaker repliedः

'O venerable Lakshmana Dadhimukha as complaining that the fruits and honey have been consumed by the vanara heroes, Angada and others who have come after their search for Sita in the southern direction.

"Those vanaras having entered Madhuvanam and broken the trees are quite right. Had they not accomplished their purpose they would not have indulged themselves that way.

"If they have trespassed into the garden that way, they might have done their duty. No doubt, Hanuman alone among them might have seen Sita.

"Hanuman alone has the ability to do it, the reason being he has the capacity the wisdom, streneous effort, virility and enthusiasm to accomplish it. These attributes are wellestablished in him.

Where Jambavan, Angada and Hanuman are leaders directing the task of the army it must have been accomplished.



"Here is Dadhimukha, a vanara, known for his valour and sweet tongue. He came here this incident to tell.

"O strongarmed Saumitri the Vanaras must have seen Sita. Or else, they would not have arrived to drink honey.

"If the renowned vanaras had not seen Vaidehi, they would not have entered the wonderful garden granted as boon (by Brahma).

"Then righteous Rama and Lakshmana rejoiced to hear the words of Sugriva, which were pleasing to the ears.

Beautifulnecked Sugriva heard Dadhimukha, the protector of the garden, felt very glad and repliedः

"They went to the garden to drink only after having performed their duty. I am glad about it. Since they have accomplished the purpose, they are to be excused for their behaviour. I have pardoned them.



"Beholding young Rama and Lakshmana extremely delighted, their eyes filled with joy out of fulfilment of the purpose, Sugriva who was also highly delighted felt an auspicious thrill on his limbs and knew that good time had come.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे त्रिषष्टितमस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the sixtythird sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.