Pleased with Sugriva's command (to send forth Angada and Hanuman) Dadhimukha offered salutations to Sugriva, Rama and Lakshmana.

Dadhimukha offered his obeisance to Sugriva and the mighty Rama and Lakshmana and rose up to the sky followed by the vanaras.

Descending into Madhuvanam, Dadhimukha saw all the monkey troops free from intoxication (of honeywine).

Heroic Dadhimukha went to Angada, holding his cupped palms reverentially and spoke these conciliatory words with joyः

"O handsome one, do not react harshly at these guards who have obstructed your companions out of ignorance and fury.

"O mighty Angada you are heir apparent and also king. Out of foolishness I obstructed you. You ought to pardon me this mistake.

"O blameless prince I have already told your father's elder brother and all the forestdwellers about your arrival here.

"He was not angry at your destruction of the garden. On the other hand, he was very glad to hear about your arrival.

"Your father's brother, Sugriva, the lord of vanaras felt very glad and indeed asked me  to send you quickly."

At these good words from Dadhimukha, Angada, the monkey leader, an eloquent speaker said thisः.

"O scorcher of enemies I presume Rama has already heard the news of our arrival on accomplishment of the task. Hence it is not proper for us to tarry here.

"The vanaras of the forest have taken rest after drinking as much honey as they desired. What is left here to do? We have to go wherever Sugriva is."

Angada said to the vanara troops assembled, "Tell me what we have to do. I shall act as you wish.

"Even though I am heir apparent, it is not proper for me to order you.You have accomplished the purpose and to command you is not befitting on my part."

On hearing Angada's valuable words said in that way, the vanaras repledः

"O king O bull among monkeys we think you are an exception to those to whom prosperity brings arrogance.

"You alone could speak such words. Your humility speaks of your fitness for a bright future.



"O Angada the best of vanaras without your command none will find it possible to put forward even a single step."

Thus addressed by all the vanaras, Angada said 'Well, let us go'. Then the powerful vanaras rose up the sky.

All the vanara troops sprang up into the air as though there was no sky, like stones shattered by machines from the mountains rise up.

The swift monkeys roared aloud as though they went up the sky like thundering clouds driven by the wind.

Seeing the griefstricken, lotuseyed Rama, the lord of the vanaras Sugriva said this before the arrival of Angadaः

"Trust me, Rama. Be blessed. The vanaras have seen the divine lady. There is no doubt. It is not possible for them to come here after exceeding the time limit (in their search for Sita).

"My heir apparent, the strongarmed Angada, and the best of the monkeys is endowed  with virtues. He would not come near me if his mission had failed.

"In case the vanaras have returned without accomplishing the task, Angada would have assumed a pathetic face, perplexed and unsteady in mind.

"If Angada, lord of the vanaras had not been happy, he would not have destroyed the Madhuvanam of my father's and my grandfather's time. O Rama, follower of righteous practices, Kausalya has an excellent son in you. Trust me.

"Hanuman is the one who has accomplished this task. Who else can? No doubt, he has seen Sita.

"O Rama, the best among the wise just like the luminosity that abides in the Sun, capacity to succeed, energy, intelligence, even courage and steadfastness reside in Hanuman.

"Where Jambavan is the leader, Angada the commander of the army and Hanuman the guiding force, the end result will not be otherwise.

"You are extremely valiant and it is unbecoming of you to be anxious at this time Rama. Just then chatterings of the monkeys were heard from the sky as they roared in pride talking of Hanuman's achievement. Having successfully completed the errand, they have arrived at Kishkinda.

The great Sugriva heard the roar of the monkeys and was extremely happy. He kept raising and shaking his long tail in joy.

The joyful monkeys with Angada and Hanuman leading them descended with eagerness to have a close look at Rama.

Angada the chief along with the heroic monkeys very joyfully and exuberantly descended close to Sugriva, the king of monkeys and Rama.

Then the strongarmed Hanuman with his head bowed down offered salutations and reported, 'Divine lady Sita with her constant devotion to Sri Rama is sound in body'.

On hearing the nectarlike words from Hanuman that Sita was found, Rama and Lakshmana were delighted.

Sugriva and Lakshmana glanced at Hanuman respectfully with affection thinking surely Hanuman alone has succeeded.

Rama, the slayer of heroic enemies was extremely delighted and glanced at Hanuman with unbounded affection.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकावे सुन्दरकाण्डे चतुःषष्टितमस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the sixtyfourth sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.