"O tiger among men In view of her regards for me and and her love for you she was confident and once again addressed meः

'You may appeal to Rama, the son of Dasaratha in many ways, that he should come quickly and slay Ravana in the battle and get me back.

'O crusher of enemies O brave Hanuman I wish you rest for a while in a secluded place around here and leave tomorrow .

'O valiant (Hanuman) by your presence here, the less fortunate me, will be relieved of sorrow for a while.

'O courageous tiger among monkeys when you depart (abruptly) I doubt if I would be alive by your return.

I am an unfortunate one, afflicted by sorrow and tormented (by demons). If I am not able to see you I will be lamenting in grief.

'O brave vanaras I have great doubts about your assistants the vanaras and bears, crossing the ocean.

'How will the vanaras and bears cross this great, impassable ocean? How will the princes Rama and Lakshmna be able to cross it?

'Only three among all beings, Garuda, the Windgod and you have the capacity to cross the ocean.

'O heroic Hanuman you know how to succeed. But I wish to know what expedient you have to accomplish which is difficult by all means. O foremost vanara, please tell me .

'O Slayer of enemy heroes you have the ability to accomplsh this task singlehanded. By succeeding in accomplishing the objective you will become renowned (and not Rama).

'When Rama slays Ravana and his entire army and takes me to his city after becoming victorious it will add glory to him.

'Tell valiant Rama not to take me back the way Ravana, the demon abducted me out of fear. Which is not right.

'If Rama, the slayer of the enemy army, could fill Lanka with his arrows and take me that will be a good sight for him to see.

'You may make arrangement in such a way that the exalted hero Rama exhibits his might according to his stature'.

"Hearing the meaningful, courteous and reasonable words of Sita, I replied ः

'O queen The lord of the army of bears and vanaras who is the foremost among the monkeys is endowed with enough strength and has resolved to rescue you.

'Mighty, powerful and tough monkeys who have the speed of thought are under the command of Sugriva.

'All of them can go upward in the sky, downward into the underworld or obliquely in any direction without obstruction. They are brilliant enough to do any great task without any difficulty.

'O great lady the mighty vanaras of extraordinary strength can fly with the wind and have even circumambulated the earth.

'There are monkeys who are more powerful than me or equal to me. None are less strong than me or Sugriva.

'When I could come here, what to speak of the mightier monkeys?, People do not send the superior ones on errand, but send only the juniors.

'O noble lady give up your lamentation. Enough of sorrowing. The vanara army will fly and reach this place at one leap and fill it.

'O noble lady the lions among men, Rama and Lakshmana who resemble Sun and Moon will ascend on my back and reach here.

'You will see the lionlike Rama, a slayer of enemies and Lakshmana wielding bow in hand standing at the entrance of Lanka very soon.

'You will hear before long the shouts of generals of the vanaras who resemble rainclouds on the mountain roaring like lions from the Malaya mountain of Lanka.

'You will soon see Rama, the slayer of enemies crowned as king of Ayodhya with you, having duly completed the term of exile in the forest'.

Sita though afflicted heard from me that you were also in excessive grief on account of separation from her and from my soothing, auspicious and welcome words, she derived comfort and remained quiet.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे अष्टषष्टितमस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the sixtyeighth sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.