The mighty Hanuman, who could assume any form at will, not finding Sita in the tall mansions, again started rapidly ranging in Lanka.

Then he reached the residence of the lord of demons enclosed by a red colour compound wall dazzling like the midday Sun.

The elephant among vanaras (Hanuman), scanned the mansion defended by dreadful demons like a forest protected by lions.

He saw beautiful silver archways decorated with gold, colourful inner apartments with beauteous entrances.

(He saw) archways guarded by riders mounted on majestic elephants and unwearied riders of chariots drawn by horses of irresistible speed kept ready.

There were wonderful chariots covered with skins of lions and tigers, encrusted with ivory, gold and silver with ringing bells moving about.

The palace was embellished with excellent seats and vessels with many precious gems. There were spacious places to accommodate big chariorts filled with shouts of great charioteers.

It was pleasing with several kinds of beautiful beasts in their thousands all over.

The place was full of beautful women, carefully protected by disciplined guards as well as demons.

Full of the jewels of joyous women, the residence of the lord of demons reverberated with the jingling of their ornaments and accessories like the sound of the sea.

The place was full of eminent demons with royal traits like a dense forest infested with lions. It carried the fragrance of agaru and sandal of good quality.

Reverberating with the sounds of trumpets, mridangam and conches, there the demons daily performed worships and sacrifices on new and fullmoon days.

The place produced deep sounds like the sea. Those mighty ogres wore gemstudded ornaments. The great vanara saw the residence of the great self, Ravana rich with precious gems.

Hanuman, the great monkey, saw the royal mansion looking brilliant with elephants, horses and chariots. He thought that the palace was the very ornament of Lanka. He moved unnoticed into the close quarters of Ravana.

Hanuman ranged undaunted from one mansion to another including the pleasure gardens.

Courageous and swift, Hanuman sprang from Prahasta's house to Mahaparshva's, and so on.

Then the great vanara leaped from the residence of Kumbhakarna which looked like a cloud to Vibhishana's.

The great vanara leaped from Mahodara's to Virupaksha's, from Vidyujjihva's to Vidyunmali and then to Vajradanstra's.

The brilliant leader of monkeys bounded to the house of Suka, to the clever Sarana's and to Indrajit's.

The noble vanara jumped from Jambumali's to Sumali's and from Rashmiketu's, Suryaketu's and to Vajrakaya's residence.

Hanuman jumped the houses of Dhumraksha, Sampati, Vidyudrupa, Bhima, Ghana and Vighana, Sukanasa, Vakra, Shatha, Vikata, Brahmakarna, Damshtra Romasa, Yuddhonmatta, Matta, Dhvajagriva, Nadi, Vidyujjihva and Indrajihva Hastimukha, Karala, Pisacha and Sonitaksha.

The illustrious son of the Windgod jumped from house to house in an order and saw the wealth of the wealthy in the lofty mansions.

Passing all the mansions, the lucky Hanuman reached the residence of the demon king, Ravana.

The heroic and powerful vanara saw at Ravana's residence demonesses with hideous eyes guarding the bed and an army of demons holding tridents, hammers, powerful javelins and iron cudgels.

At his (Ravana's) residence, Hanuman also noticed troops of huge demons ready with different kinds of weapons.

He saw horses of high speed in red, white and cream colours. He saw beautiful, wellbred elephants, which were not inferior to the enemy's. They were welltrained and had proved equal to Airavata (Indra's elephant) in battles. Resembling the thundering clouds, they were unassailable to the enemy in war and were trumpeting like a cluster of clouds.

He saw in the palace of Ravana, the demon king, thousands of troops adorned with gold, fully protected with armour of gold shining like the morning Sun.

The son of the Windgod saw at the palace of Ravana, the lord of demons, colourful palanquins of several kinds, bowers, picture galleries, spots for sporting, hillocks (artificial) made of wood, apartments for romance, for pleasures and day time activities.

Comparable to mount Mandara, it was crowded with peacocks, set with flag staffs fixed all over, magnificent mansions built by skilled craftsmen with great efforts, decked with gems of several kinds, rich with treasures comparable to Kailasa, the home of Siva, the Lord of all beings.

The palace of Ravana looked splendid with gems of different hues and with Ravana's presence, it was shining like the radiant Sungod.

The leader of the vanaras saw there beds, seats and main vessels made of gold.

Hanuman entered the delightful, lofty palace comparable to Kubera's mansion. It was filled with vessels encrusted with gems scattered all over. The floor was drenched with liquor. It was resonating with sounds of golden anklets of women and of drums. The rows of mansions, lofty palaces with welllaid apartments were full of hundreds of exquisite women.  इत्यार्षे वाल्मीकीये श्रीमद्रामायणे आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे षष्ठस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the sixth sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.