Powerful Hanuman beheld the conglomeration of buildings with golden lattices encrusted with vaidurya, with flocks of birds comparable to a complex of clouds pierced by lightning during rainy season.

Attached to the spacious halls of the houses, were storehouses for valuable conches, weapons, bows and arrows. On the top of the attics on these mansions,  were large and delightful terraces open to the Moon.

The monkey saw numerous kinds of treasures, cherished by gods and demons, which were won by Ravana's might.

The mansions of the lord of Lanka built with great care and effort on earth were by all means excellent and appeared as though built personally by Maya (the divine architect wellknown for magical skills).

Hanuman beheld the magnificent and soulcaptivating palace possessing the splendour of molten gold. Of matchless beauty, it looked like a towering cloud worthy of the might of Ravana, the lord of ogresses.

It appeared splendid like a scattered piece of heaven on earth, glittering with countless gems. It looked like a mountain peak covered with pollen of flowers dropped from all kinds of trees.

The aerial chariot was lit up by resplendent women just as a raincloud dazzles with flashes of lightning. It was auspicious, worthy of worship. It looked as if it was drawn by royal swans in the sky.

A jewel among aerial chariots, it looked colourful with many gems beset. It appeared like the summit of a mountain decorated with the colours of minerals, like the sky bespangled with planets and the Moon and like a mass of multicoloured clouds adorned by a rainbow.

The whole earth had been picturised on it. It was filled with rows of mountains and a canopy of trees all over. The trees were filled with lovely flowers with petals and filaments drawn on them.

There were pictures of mansions white in colour and pools of crystalclear water filled with lovely flowers. There were pictures of beautiful lotuses drawn on it.

There, the great Hanuman indeed saw a splendid chariot called Pushpaka. It was glowing with glittering gems. Taller than the biggest mansion, it was a great chariot.

Inside were birds made of vaidurya, silver and corals. There were colourful serpents made of various gems, and highclass horses of exquisite limbs drawn.

It had curved figures of birds with beautiful wings carved out of corals and gold The wings were shining as if they were really the wings of allies of Cupid, the god of love.

He saw on it lotus ponds, artificial elephants with shapely trunks, offering to Laxmi who herself was a lotus, holding in her beautiful hands blue lotuses shining with filaments.

Thus he reached the auspicious palace appearing like a beautiful mountain and stood wonderstruck. Once again he looked at that beautiful palace which appeared like a mountain with lovely caverns in spring time filled with wonderful fragrance

Then Hanuman moved about that cherished city ruled by the strength of arms of the tenheaded king. Unable to find venerable Sita, who was deprived of the benefit of her husband's virtuous proximity, he became deeply sad.

Unable to find Sita, the disciplined and foresighted Hanuman, who always kept the righteous path, felt distressed while moving about, his mind oppressed by all kinds of thought.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे सप्तमस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the seventh sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.