Ravana, who was proud of his skill in warfare, became very angry when he was pained by Kakuthsa's arrows.

Valiant hero, Ravana, with his eyes flaming in anger, raising his bow, rained arrows at Sri Rama. He continued to rain thousands of arrows just as rain filled the tank, his arrows covered Raghava.

Sri Rama did not get agitated, and stood like a huge mountain, even though the network of arrows released from the bow of Ravana covered him in the conflict.

Valiant Sri Rama stood intercepting them when streams of arrows covered him, and tolerated them like the rays of the Sun.

Thereafter the quickhanded angry night ranger struck into the chest of Raghava thousands of arrows.

In that conflict Lakshmana's elder brother looked like a huge Kimsuka tree in bloom in the forest body being covered with blood all over.

Endowed with extraordinary energy, Kakuthsa, angered by the impact of arrows resembled the Sun at the end of universal dissolution, took up arrows.

Then with both Rama and Ravana speedily releasing (hail of) arrows on one another, the battlefield was darkened by arrows, and they were not able to see each other.

Then Rama, the heroic son of Dasharatha, overcome by anger, laughing at Ravana, spoke these words.

"Lowly Rakshasa! My wife was abducted by you ignorantly when she was helpless. Therefore, you are not valiant."

"Having abducted Vaidehi living in the forest by force, when she was desperate and separated from me, do you think that you are a hero?

"Timid fellow! You having laid hands on another woman think you are a hero? You, who have done such an action, think that you are a hero?"

"O shameless one! You have transgressed morality and traditional practice. You are dissolute and by your pride seeking death. You think that you are a hero!"

"By laudable great action performed by you (of abducting Sita and your penance) you have attained fame. You are a heroic brother of Kubera, rich in might."

"You will attain the great result of your hurtful action, overpowered by pride and vanity today."

"O Evil minded fellow! You boast yourself as a hero, while you abducted Sita like a thief. Shame did not stand in your way."

"If Sita had been seen by me forcibly taken by you in my presence, then you would have been killed by my arrows and seen your brother Khara."

"O selfish Ravana! Today you have come in my sight by good fortune. I shall send you to the abode of Yama with my arrows."

"Now, let your head severed by my shafts lying in dust in the battlefield with the shining earrings be dragged by the carnivorous animals."

"Ravana! After your body is caused to destroy and scattered on the ground, let the vultures drink the blood oozing from your chest pierced by the heads of my arrows."

"Let the birds tear your intestines as eagles would tear off snakes, now when your body is split and fallen, split by my arrows and ceased of life."

Speaking in this way to Ravana who was nearby, Rama the exterminator of enemies rained showers of arrows and covered.

The strength, valiance, enthusiasm, and the strength of missiles of Rama, who was desirous of the destruction of the enemy, doubled.

All missiles appeared before Rama because of his richness in selfknowledge. In his excessive energy and joy the prince became more skillful with his hands.

Rama, who can put an end to Rakshasas, knower of his own self having experienced auspicious signs, began to strike at Ravana more vehemently.

By the stones thrown by the Vanaras and rain of shafts from Raghava, the ten headed Ravana was pained and was bewildered.

Being confused mentally, Ravana did not start his arrows, nor stretch his bow, nor was able to use missiles and was not able to oppose Rama's valour.

Ravana's arrows of several kinds being destroyed, perceiving that his death is objective Rama's missiles, and that the time of death appeared, he was unable to act.

Observing his (Ravana's) condition, the charioteer quietly, slowly withdrew his chariot from the battlefield.

Then the charioteer perceiving that the king has lost his valiance and fallen, went quickly from the battlefield, in fear, as the chariot was rumbling like a terrible cloud.  ।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेपञ्चोत्तरशततमस्सर्गः ।।  This is the end of the hundred and fifth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.