Then there ensued a fierce duel between Rama and Ravana that was fearsome to the whole world.

Then, both Rakshasa army and huge Vanara army, stood motionless holding their weapons ready.

Then, when the mighty human and the Rakshasa were both engaged in the battle, distracted at heart, all experienced supreme wonderment.

All the army on both sides lifted their hands up, holding different kinds of implements, and were amazed looking at them and did not attack one another.

The army of Rakshasas was looking at Ravana and the Vanaras were looking at Raghava with astonishment as though it was a wonderful picture.

Both Ravana and Rama, seeing their portents, firmly resolved in mind with indignation, fought fearlessly.

Kakuthsa Rama, sure of his victory and Ravana thinking surely of his death, exhibited their prowess totally in the battle, with determination.

Thereafter, valiant ten headed Ravana, fixing arrows released them in anger aiming at the flag post of Rama's chariot.

Those arrows, without reaching the post on Indra's chariot, touching the chariot fell on ground.

Valiant Rama too stretching his bow in anger and thinking of returning back blow to Ravana and started compliance.

Rama, intolerant like a snake, targeting Ravana's post, released a sharp bright glowing arrow.

Glorious Rama aiming at the flag post of Ravana, released an arrow that tore the post and went into the ground.

Ravana's flag post fell down, struck by Rama. Mighty Ravana, observing his post being struck, became intolerant, and burning in anger, laughing, rained showers of arrows at Rama out of fury.

Ravana with his burning arrows pierced Rama's horses. Those horses were wonderful as they did not stagger or reel as if hurt by lotus stalks and remained complacent.

Ravana perceived that the horses were just unperturbed by his arrows, became enraged and showered arrows excessively.

Ravana used maces, iron bars, discuses, clubs, mountain peaks, trees and also tridents and axes.

Unwearied at heart, Ravana let loose rain of arrows created by magic in thousands.

In that war, noisy, alarming, fearful loud noise of weapons of different kinds, in huge numbers, descended.

Obstructed by Raghava's chariot on all sides, the arrows covered the Vanara army and up to the sky.

Seeing the ten headed Ravana releasing arrows with enthusiasm, not thinking of anything in his mind, quickly Kakuthsa laughed at them, fixed pointed arrows, and released hundreds and thousands.

Seeing the arrows in the sky released by Rama, even Ravana released arrows up to the sky. With the arrows released by both of them, the space became resplendent and by the network of arrows covering it seemed like another sky.

The arrows released by both Rama and Ravana were without result. None failed to reach the target. None failed to complete the target. The arrows were colliding with one another and fell on the ground.

Discharging from right and left, the two heroes without break vehemently released dreadful arrows that covered the sky and left no breathing space between them.

Ravana struck Rama's horses and Rama struck Ravana's horses blow to blow at that time.

Both became furious in that way and the best duel took place for a moment that was fierce and horipulating.

While the mighty Ravana and Lakshmana's elder brother were fighting with arrows, the Rakshasa king's flag post had fallen down, and Ravana became extremely angry at Rama for that.  ।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेनवोत्तरशततमस्सर्गः ।।  This is the end of one hundred and ninth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.