Enraged out of delusion, by force of destiny, Ravana's eyes turned red in anger and spoke to his charioteer.

"You dullard! Disdaining me as not capable, lacking manliness, powerless, deficient in valour, timid, incapable, petty, devoid of energy, not knowing conjuring tricks, abandoned weapons, driven out, you act not knowing me in your own way foolishly using your discretion."

Not knowing my opinion, for what reason have you removed my chariot in the presence of my enemy, belittling me?

"O evil minded one! My fame, glory, valiance and bravery earned over a long period has been wiped out by you."

"While my adversary's valour is widely known, you brought me back like a timid one, while I love war, while I am to be praised in the presence of my enemy."

"O Evil minded one! If out of delusion you are not willing to drive, truly you are influenced by the enemy."

What has been done by you is not befitting, this is What an enemy should have done. Being good at heart you have done What is good for enemy.

"If you remember that you lived long with me and know my virtues, quickly turn back the chariot before my adversary with draws.

When the insensitive Ravana spoke harshly in that manner, to the charioteer who was wishing his benefit, he spoke in friendly language to Ravana.

"I was not fearing, nor foolish, not won by the enemy, not negligent also, not lacking friendliness and not forgetting good deeds done by you."

Wishing your welfare, for your fame and to protect you with a friendly and pleasant feeling I did that which is good for you. You are unpleasant about this action.

"O King! I who wish your welfare ought not to be blamed like an unworthy and pettyminded person by mistake."

"O yes! I will answer you. Please listen. like the river entering the ocean speedily is diverted, I have taken back the chariot from the battle.

"Great Ravana! After the strenuous task in the battle, there was no exhibition of your valour, and I did not cognize any superiority in your action."

"The horses of my chariot were exhausted by dragging, broken down, worn out by the hot sun, and desperate like cows lashed by rain."

"Those portents manifesting again and again, that I am seeing, all of them are in the reverse direction (meaning not proptitious)."

"Propitious and unpropitious, time and place, good and evil signs and omens, depression and liveliness of the warrior as well as strength and weakness of the one in the chariot must be ascertained."

"The earths' ups and downs, evenness and ruggedness, difficult locations, the right time and place for war should be known in advance and the inner weakness of the enemy also to be known."

"To hold the chariot or advance, to go near the (enemy) or retreat, to return back or advance, everything should be known to the charioteer."

"The reason for retreating in this way is to give you rest and relieve the horses from the terrible feat and fatigue. I deserve to be excused for this action."

"Heroic Lord! I have not brought back this chariot independently (without thinking). I have acted in friendliness to the master (to give rest) not otherwise."

"O Tamer of enemies! Order now and in that way, I shall carry out your order in accordance with you wholeheartedly."

Ravana was fully satisfied with the words of the charioteer. He praised the charioteer in many ways and spoke like this desiring to wage war.

"Quickly drive the chariot towards Raghava. As a policy, Ravana would never turn back on the battlefield without putting an end to the enemy."

Fully satisfied with Charioteer's words, Ravana bestowed him with an excellent auspicious ornament of the hand. On hearing Ravana's words, the charioteer advanced the chariot.

Then,instructed by Ravana,his charioteer started to drive Rakshasa lord's chariot.In a moment,the great chariot stood before Rama's chariot.  ।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेषडुत्तरशततमस्सर्गः ।।  This is the end of one hundred and sixth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic, the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.