Seeing Lakshmana struck by exceedingly mighty, evil minded Ravana's javelin and soaked in blood Rama giving intense fight by discharging arrows also spoke as follows to Sushena.

'Heroic Lakshmana struck by Ravana, fell on the ground and writhing like a snake and rolling made me sad'.

' As I see Lakshmana, who is more than my life, and loving soaked in blood, my mind is agitated. How can I have the energy to fight?'

'Lakshmana, my brother, is praised for his efficiency in war, is endowed with auspicious marks. If he is met with death, what use is my happiness and life for me?'

'My heroism is shy, my bow slips from my hand, arrows are dropping, my vision is blurred with tears with my brother gone.'

'Seeing Lakshmana in this state, just as in dream, my limbs are retrieving while walking, being on the point of death intense sorrow is growing and the desire to live is gone.'

Seeing the brother struck in vital parts and wounded by the evilminded Ravana, Rama was filled with grief and breathing heavily.

Beholding his dear brother, who is his life outside him overcome by anxiety, Rama lost senses and gave himself to great sorrow.

Seeing the wounded brother Lakshmana in the battlefield, the very sad Rama lost control over his senses and grieved.

'O Hero! Even victory for me will not give joy. What pleasure will one have if he desires to see the moon when he has lost vision?'

'What purpose is there to fight in battle or in life with Lakshmana lying in the forefront struck in the battlefield?'

'Lakshmana who is endowed with splendour followed me to the forest. In the same way I will follow him to the god of death.'

'Lakshmana, who loved the kin and was devoted to me, has been led to pass by the Rakshasas.'

'Wives can be found everywhere, relatives can be found everywhere but biological sibling brothers are not found in any place.'

Grieving in this manner, lost control over senses, and discrimination, Rama was sighing again and again and was pitiable. Sushena, the hero consoling Rama spoke these words.

'Without Lakshmana who is difficult to win, what use is kingdom to me? What can I tell mother Sumithra who is the lover of her son?'

O Broad shouldered Rama! Enhancer of prosperity, Lakshmana is not dead. His face has not changed, and he has not lost splendour.

'His face is radiant and pleasing to see. His palms are like red lotuses and his eyes are so pleasant'.

"O hero! Those who cease to live will not have such appearance and signs. He who is a tamer of foes is alive. I tell you, do not grieve."

"From the movement of his limbs and throbbing of his heart again and again it is known that he is alive."

Very wise Sushena, having spoken like that to Raghava, spoke to the great Vanara, Hanuman nearby.

"O gentle Hanumantha! Going to that mountain of herbs about which Jambavan had earlier spoken to you, get the herbs from the southern peak of that great mountain. To make Lakshmana the great soul alive quickly go and get Savarankarani, Sarvakarani so also Sanjeevakarani and Sandhanakarani and come."

Sushena having said so, glorious Hanuman set out to the mountain of herbs. Not able to recognise the herbs he thought over.

Highly brilliant Hanuman used his intellect and thought to seize the peak of the mountain on which herbs had sprung.

By reasoning it is known that the herb which is good for him is grown in this peak, for Sushena said so.

'If I go without taking Visalakarani, through the passage of time huge mistakes will happen and perplexity will arise'.

Hanuman, the mighty among the Vanaras, thinking so quickly reached the foremost of the mountains, seized the mountain with both hands by shaking it thrice, uprooted the plants with flowers in bloom and balanced it with his hands.

Like a dark cloud filled with water carried by wind, Hanuman held the mountain peak and went in the air from the surface of the earth.

Hanuman came at high speed with the mountain and letting it down and resting for a while spoke as follows.

"O leader of the Vanaras! I did not know those herbs. So, the mountain peak was brought here by me."

The son of wind god, having revealed it like that, Sushena the leader of the Vanaras uprooted the herb and took out.

It is a difficult task even for Suras. Seeing Hanuman doing it all the Vanara leaders were amazed.

Thereafter, Sushena the foremost of the Vanaras, a brilliant one crushed the herbs and dropped the extract into Lakshmana's nose.

The destroyer of enemies, Lakshmana, who was pained by the javelin stuck in his body, on inhaling the herb, was devoid of javelin and rid of pain. He got up from the ground.

Seeing Lakshmana rise up from the surface of the ground, the Vanaras said Well done and offered prayers very affectionately.

Rama the destroyer of enemies seeing Lakshmana saying, 'come come', eyes filled with tears of joy affectionately embraced him and spoke.

Embracing Saumithri, Rama spoke 'luckily you have recovered from death again and I am able to see you'.

'Lakshmana! If you had not come out of death, what use is life to me? What is the use of Sita? What is the meaning of life' said Rama?

When Raghava had spoken in that manner, Lakshmana spoke, pained by the irresolute talk (of Rama).

"You who are of truthful valour having made a vow, now speaking in this way, like a lowly person is not appropriate."

'Those who speak truth never fail their vows futile for fulfilment of the vows is a mark of greatness for them'.

"O Sinless Rama! To be in despair on my account is not fair. Destroy Ravana and redeem your vow."

" A victim of your arrow can not be alive just as an elephant fallen into the clutch of a roaring lion with sharp teeth is not possible to live."

"I wish to see the destruction of this evil minded one quickly before the sun completes the day and sets."

"O hero! Noble one! If you wish to kill Ravana in the war and fulfill your vow and longing for the daughter of Janaka you do quickly What I say."  ।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेद्व्युत्तरशततमस्सर्गः.।।  This is the end of the hundred and two sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.