In the meantime, Devas, Gandharvas, Danavas speaking to each other an auspicious story of Ravana's destruction went in their respective aerial cars.

Speaking about the highly respected Raghava's prowess, the end of dreadful Ravana, the good fighting of Vanaras, counsel of Sugriva, valour of Hanuman, love of Lakshmana, fidelity of Sita, all rejoiced and returned as they had come.

Bidding farewell to Matali joyously, honourable Raghava returned the aerial chariot bestowed to him by Indra.

Matali, charioteer of Indra too taking Raghava's permission went to heaven in that wonderful chariot.

"On Matali ascending to heaven, Raghava very dearly embraced Sugriva for his help in his victory."

On embracing Sugriva, greeted by Lakshmana, and worshipped by the army of Vanaras, Rama returned to the camp.

And then, Kakuthsa spoke to Saumithri, of auspicious nature and endowed richly with prowess, who stood close by.

"Gentle Lakshmana! Vibheeshana is friendly to me and devoted. He has done me good work in the past. Consecrate him in Lanka."

"O gentle Lakshmana! I desire to see this Vibheeshana, Ravana's brother, consecrated at Lanka"

Great selfRaghava having spoken like that, Saumithri, very happily arranged to get a golden vessel.

Commanded like that, Lakshmana, endowed with mighty prowess placed that vessel in the hands of Vanara chief, who was endowed with the speed of the mind, to get water from the ocean.

Then the foremost of the Vanaras, endowed with the speed of mind, with all speed went and got water from the ocean.

Vibheeshana was made to sit on an excellent seat, surrounded by hosts of friends and dear ones. Thereafter, in the midst of Rakshasas chanting sacred verses in accordance with scriptures, Saumithri took a vessel of water and duly consecrated Vibhishana with the water in the vessel as commanded by Rama, in Lanka.

Thereafter all the Rakshasas and Vanaras also consecrated with extreme joy and paid tribute to Rama alone.

Seeing Vibheeshana consecrated and becoming a king of Lanka, all his ministers and devotees felt rejoiced.

Vibheeshana felt extreme felicity for attaining the kingdom given by great Rama with Lakshmana.

Consoling the subjects of the kingdom with good words, Vibheeshana sought Rama's presence. The people were very happy and brought curds, yellow rice grains (rice mixed with turmeric), flowers and sweets and parched grain and offered.

Valiant Vibheeshana, who is difficult to encounter, presented the benign offerings and auspicious ones received by him to Rama and Lakshmana.

Rama having accomplished the task, thoughtfully pleased did not desire for the offerings, accepted them to please Vibheeshana.

Then Rama, seeing a heroic mountain like Hanuman, who stood there in supplicant mood greeting him with joined palms, spoke these words.

"O Gentle Hanuman! Taking the permission of the great king Vibheeshana, entering the city of Lanka, enquire the wellbeing of Mythili."

"Convey to Vaidehi that me and Lakshman and also Sugriva are doing well, and that Ravana has been killed, O Best among the eloquent."

"O chief of Vanaras! You convey this agreeable message to Vaidehi and ought to return after receiving her message."  ।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेपञ्चदशोत्तरशततमस्सर्गः ।।  This is the end of one hundred and fifteenth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.