Observing Mythili who stood near him, Rama started to give expression to what was in his heart.

"O Auspicious Sita! You are won by destruction of the enemy in the battlefield. What was worth doing has been done with all my effort."

"I have put an end to the indignity that I lost. I gained reward for the insult. The indignity offered by the enemy has been wiped out all at once."

"Now you see the result of my effort. I am successful and fulfilled my vow. Today I am independent."

"When you were alone you were abducted by the fickle minded Rakshasa. The fault of destiny has been won by me, a mortal by the will of god।।"

"What is the purpose of might however great he might be, if he is petty minded and does not wipe off the insult?"

"Hanuman's leaping across the ocean and devastating action of Lanka has yielded results now."

"The prowess of Sugriva and also his army, his good advice and efforts in combat have become successful."

"In the same way even Vibheeshana's hard work leaving his brother devoid of good qualities and coming to me on his own has given success."

Sita's broad eyes which were like that of female deer were filled with tears on hearing the words of Rama.

Rama was already hurt and on seeing Sita who was dear to his heart nearby, he was burning with the fear of public opinion.

In the midst of Vanaras and Rakshasas, Rama spoke with great discomfort to Sita whose eyes were like lotus petals and hair was dark and curly and whose limbs were beautiful.

"That which my mind desired as a duty of a human being, to get rid of the insult has been done by killing Ravana."

"Though the southern quarter is difficult to assail for the world of mortals, Agastya, a realized sage, has won by the power of his austerity. In the same way I have won you."

"Sita! This effort in carrying out with the assistance of valiant friends is not done for your sake. Let it be known to you. I have done this to protect good conduct and my illustrious race from scandal and rid of obloquy from all sides."

"In the event of doubtful conduct also you are standing firmly like a glowing lamp for me suffering from sore eyes and disagreeable to me."

"O Janaka's daughter! therefore now you are permitted to go wherever to any quarter. Let you be auspicious. I have no work with you."

"Which eminent man born in a good race will again consciously accept a wife who lived in another's home?"

"You are thrown out of the arms of Ravana. You have been seen by him with lustful eyes, have been seen by all with evil eyes. How can one born in a great race accept you again?"

"The reason for winning you back is to get rid of the insult. Now I have no interest in you. You may go to the place of your choice."

" Auspicious one! This utterance has been thought over well today. You may go wherever you find happiness, either to Lakshmana or else to Bharata. Think well and do."

"Sita! You can go to Shatrughna or else Sugriva or even Rakshasa Vibheeshana, wherever you feel like to live."

"Sita! You are endowed with beauty and having you in his own house for so long and seeing you, how Ravana could have resisted or detained you."

Then having heard unpalatable words from her beloved, Mythili wept, quivering excessively shedding tears for long and was like a creeper struck by a Lordly elephant.  ।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेअष्टादशोत्तरशततमस्सर्गः ।।  This is the end of one hundred eighteenth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.