Having been commanded, Hanuman offered prayers to Vibheeshana and entered Lanka.

The monkey, having sought the permission of Vibheeshana, entered Lanka city. Duly entering the Asoka grove, he attracted the attention of Sita, who was weak with no bath, cheerless, seated at the root of the tree, like Rohini star. After reaching the grove, he greeted Sita with folded palms and stood motionless.

Seeing the mighty Hanuman, who arrived quietly, she was quiet. Then she saw him and experienced joy on recognizing him

Gentle Hanuman, the foremost of the monkeys, seeing her started to communicate every word of Rama.

Hanuman said" O Vaidehi! Sri Rama accompanied by Sugriva and Lakshmana, with the help of Vibheeshana, is doing well."

"Noble lady! Sri Rama killed Ravana and won the enemy. He accomplished the purpose with the help of Vibheeshana, the valiant Lakshmana and the monkeys also so to speak. He inquired of your wellbeing."

"O noble lady! I am communicating delightful news to you. O Sita, a respectable lady and knowledgeable one, the victory is attained in the combat by the great soul Rama, by virtue of your strength and devotion."

'Ravana has been killed, Lanka is under our side vanquished completely. Without any sleep, with forbearance, building an extensive bridge on the great ocean, the vow has been redeemed', is Rama's message to you, said Hanuman.

"This Lanka is under Vibheeshana, Lord of Lanka. There is no need for perturbation thinking that you are in Ravana's abode."

"You be at ease, as you are living in your own abode", said Hanuman consoling Sita. 'Vibheeshana, who is very happy, is eager and favouring to see you."

Hanuman having spoken in that way, Sita got up in excessive joy and could not speak naturally.

Then seeing Sita not answering him, the monkey chief asked her" Why are you not replying. What are you thinking?"

When Hanuman spoke in that way virtuous Sita was overwhelmed with joy and spoke with a voice choked with tears.

"No doubt that my husband is victorious is very delightful. Hearing this, I am overcome with delight and am unable to speak for a moment."

"Hanuman! However, I think to give you a befitting gift for this happy news. I am not able to see any."

"I am not able to see on this earth, a gift befitting the value of your message, which can be given to you to make you happy."

"Neither gold or silver or gems, not even kingdom or the three worlds are equal to what you have spoken now."

Spoken in that way by Vaidehi, Hanuman stood with folded palms in front of Sita and replied in delight.

"You alone can speak such affectionate words in this manner wishing victory and welfare of your dear husband. You are irreproachable."

"O gentle one! Your meaningful words full of affection are more valuable than clusters of gems or Indra, the Lord of gods."

"Now that the enemy is killed, Rama is happy, which means as if I have attained the rulership of gods."

Hearing the words of Mythili, daughter of Janaka, Hanuman spoke these auspicious words.

Continuing to pay tribute to Hanuman's words, Sita said" Your language and expression are always richly endowed with virtuous qualities, sweet and valuable, combined with eight excellences. (Eight excellences areKeenness to hear discourses, readiness to hear discourses, receptivity, retentive power, reasoning for a proposition, against a proposition, faculty of comprehension, realization of truth)."

"You are a praiseworthy son of wind god. In strength, righteousness, valour, vigour, prowess, skill, you are excellent. You are energetic, endowed with tolerance, forbearance, firmness, brilliance, and humility. You alone have many more qualities, no doubt."

Now with folded palms offering prayers to Sita, Hanuman stood without perturbation, with all humility and again spoke to Sita.

"I desire to kill all those Rakshasas who in the past have intimidated you indeed and whoever threatened you."

"O Devi! You, who were so devoted to your husband, were tormented in Asoka grove earlier. These cruel Rakshasas of hideous conduct, of fierce and distorted forms with terrible eyes addressing you in harsh words by Ravana's order, were heard by me."

"I wish to kill by all kinds of strokes, these cruel distorted forms of Rakshasas having terrible hair and fierce eyes and not to mention their violence. Permit me."

"These Rakshasas who have wronged, who are of dreadful appearance, I wish to hit them with fists, with feet spreading long arms, strike with blows of shanks and knees, with teeth, and torment by pulling their ears and nose. Their hair will be torn off violently, their faces will be made dry, they will be tossed up, torn with different sharp conches. Their broken bodies, heads, necks, and trunks will be thrown down and killed. Grant this boon to me."

"O Illustrious lady! I would like to kill the terrible forms of ogres who threatened you, in that way, I will be at and strike in many ways and destroy them", said Hanuman to Sita.

Hanuman having spoken like that, Sita who was fond of the desperate, thus spoke to Hanuman thinking for a while.

"Foremost of Vanaras! Who will be angry? Being under the command of the king and being obedient maids, they did so according to king's order.



"Mighty Armed Hanuman! Do not speak in this manner. It was my fate which was supreme. Because of my predetermined circumstances I reaped such a result. I am feeblehearted and condone the maids surely."

"By Ravana's order they threatened me so. Now with his death, they will not be threatening me."

"O Monkey! In olden days a bear had uttered a verse which conforms to righteousness. I shall tell you now."



"Sinners or noble men, having done a wrong deed and deserve death. Also noble, will show compassion and not commit harm."

"Rakshasas by nature are cruel in their deeds and can assume any form according to their will. No sinful actions to be done even if they do sinful actions."

Sita, having spoken that way to Hanuman, he, who was capable of good expression, replied as follows to Rama's consort, who was irreproachable.

"Devi! you are the righteous wife of Rama and earned fame. Give me the right message to Rama in return. I will go."

Hanuman, having spoken that way to Vaidehi, daughter of Janaka, she said" I desire to see my husband."

On hearing Mythili, wise Hanuman spoke these words to her bringing joy to her.

"Now you will see Sri Rama whose countenance resembles the moon, with Lakshmana, with friends who are alive, with friends whose enemies are gone, just as Sachi, the consort of Indra, the Lord of gods saw."

Hanuman reached Raghava with extraordinary speed assuring Sita, who shone like Lakshmi, goddess of prosperity, and had spoken like that.

Then Hanuman, the choicest of the monkeys, speedily delivered in turn every word of the message in the same order, in sequence to Raghava, who resembled the Lord of gods.  ।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेषोडशोत्तरशततमस्सर्गः ।।  This is the end of one hundred and sixteenth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.