Vaidehi heard the harsh horripilating words spoken by Rama in anger and was very much afflicted.

Then Mythili hearing her husband 's harsh words, in the presence of a large number of people, stayed bent with shyness.

As if pierced by those arrowlike words, Janaka's daughter shed tears excessively, shrinking into her own limbs.

Thereafter, wiping her face clean from flowing tears she spoke slowly in a choked voice in broken words to her husband.

"Hero! Why are you addressing me in such harsh unkind words in a rude manner, in a harsh tone like a common man?"

"O Mighty armed! I am not as you think of me, so also show me a proof of it in my past. I swear on my past."

"You give up judging all womankind by the path followed by vulgar women. You give up these doubts if you have examined."

"O Lord! I was helpless when Ravana contacted my limbs in the past. I was not acting according to my will. My fate is to be blamed and not me."

"That mind which is under my control is my heart and it abides in you. What can I do about my limbs when I am at others' mercy?"

"Honourable Rama! If I am not understood by you despite our growing up together with love and in spite of our intimate relationship, I am done forever."

"King! When the great hero Hanuman was sent by you to find me in Lanka, why did you not leave me then."

"O hero! Had you given me up immediately on receiving your message from Vanara I would have given up my life in the presence of Hanuman there itself."

"O Life! If you had a doubt this exertion to you is wasteful. This fruitless hard work was perhaps not required on your part nor your friends."

"O tiger among kings! You also gave up yourself to anger like a weak man and adopted womanliness"



"When in my young age you held my hand as a mark of acceptance (in our marriage), has it not been considered by you? Has my devotion, character and chastity not been taken into account?"

Thus speaking, and weeping with tears, with choked throat, Sita was absorbed in her mind and piteous. She spoke to Lakshmana.

"Saumithri! Cure for this sorrow is only pyre. Arrange for pyre as I do not desire to live with false reproaches."

"When my husband is not pleased with my virtues, renounces me in the gathering of people, I have only that path for me, that is, entering fire and offering myself as oblation."

Spoken in that manner by Vaidehi, Lakshmana, the destroyer of enemies, overcome with indignation looked at Raghava.

Understanding Rama's indication from his looks, Saumithri started to prepare the earth for pyre.

Indeed, no friend or dear could see or speak or make a request or pacify Rama. at that time.

Thereafter, Vaidehi, walking clockwise near Rama went round him in accordance with tradition and approached the pyre.

Mythili greeted the gods and brahmanas with joined palms and went near fire and again joined her palms in greeting and spoke as follows.

"If it is true that my heart has never slid from Raghava at all, may the fire god protect me always and so also the world witness."

"If in Rama's view, I am of impeccable conduct and so also if what he is seeing is not known to be true, let the world witness and fire god protect me."

'If I have ever acted or been unfaithful at heart or in speech and did not follow a righteous path with Rama, who is a knower of all virtues, let the fire god protect me."

"O gods! Supreme Aditya, wind god, god of the four quarters, and also by moon, and gods presiding during day, night, twilight and so also earth, know me as a woman of good character, let the fire god protect me that way."

Having spoken in that way, Vaidehi went round fire fearlessly, absorbed with in herself and entered the flaming and burning fire.

Young and old assembled there, and the gathering of people witnessed Mythili entering the flaming and burning fire.

Like freshly polished gold, like shining gold ornament, in the presence of the whole world she fell into flaming and glowing fire.

All created beings and forms witnessed large eyed Sita descending on the golden altar, into the fire like goddess of fortune descending on her vehicle.

All the three worlds witnessed noble dark Sita entering the fire, like ghee offered to fire.

All the women who stood there fled, screaming on seeing Sita falling into fire, like the flow of ghee poured continuously into sacrificial fire reciting sacred verses by priests.

All the Devas, Gandharvas and Danavas of the three worlds who witnessed her falling, extolled her as if goddess was falling from heaven into hell.

While Sita was entering the fire the Rakshasas and the Vanaras made loud noises saying, 'Ha Ha wonderful'.  ।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेएकोनविंशत्युत्तरशततमस्सर्गः ।।  This is the end of one hundred and nineteenth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.