As Rama and Ravana were thus fighting in war, all beings watched with astonishment in mind.

Both of them were moving quickly seeking to gain one another, very furiously persevering.

Both striking one another diligently, going in circles moving forward and backward displaying feats, went on.

Ravana hurting Rama and vice versa displaying quickness in retaliation and speed of arrows, the fight happened.

The network of arrows released by both of them from the chariots were like water streams from two clouds in the battlefield

Then those two, having seen many movements, once again stood facing each other in the battlefield.

The two chariots stood facing each other on the battlefield once more, the axle of one chariot facing the axle of another chariot, the flag of one with another flag, the standard with another standard, the face of one horse with the face of another horse stood and it seemed as though they were together.

Thereupon, Rama, stretching the bow, released four sharp glowing arrows at Ravana's four horses and drove them back.

Fallen prey to anger for retreating the horses, the ten headed Ravana released pointed arrows on Raghava.

Raghava, though wounded by the mighty Ravana's arrows, did notexperience suffering or agitation, nor disquiet.

The ten headed Ravana with his thunderbolt like hands hurled arrows and struck the charioteer of Rama, making sounds like thunder.

Even though the arrows fell on Matali's body at great speed, he did not feel perturbed or experience even slight suffering.

Rama was furious for tormenting Matali like that, but not for hurting him and in fury discharged a network of arrows on him (Ravana) and diverted him.

Heroic Raghava thereafter, let loose shafts in twenties, thirties, sixties, hundreds, and thousands at Ravana's chest.

Enraged Ravana, the king of Rakshasas, also in return, retaliated with maces and mallets.

Once again ensued a tumultuous war fought with maces, mallets, and iron bars, caused hair to stand and the resound of the speed of weapons caused agitation in the seven seas.

By the agitation and sounds in the seas, all the Danavas and snakes in thousands inhabiting the seas got distressed.

The entire globe with its mountains, gardens and forests shook, the Sun lost his radiance, even the wind did not blow.

Thereafter, the Gandharvas, Devas, Siddhas, great sages, Kinneras and huge serpents all of them became anxious.

"May the hosts of sages, Devas, cows and brahmanas be auspicious. May all the worlds endure forever. May Rama conquer Ravana, the Rakshasa king," chanting in that manner all witnessed the terrific war between Rama and Ravana that caused hair to stand.

Gandharvas and Apsaras watching the combination of Rama and Ravana fighting an unimaginable war said that sky is its own analogue for sky, sea is its own analogue to sea, in the same way is the struggle between Rama and Ravana is unique like Rama and Ravana's struggle and looked at the combat.

Then the mighty armed Raghava, enhancer of glory, in wrath like a venomous snake, fitting the bow with arrows cut off the head of Ravana graced with shining earrings. Then the three worlds witnessed the head cut off and fallen on the earth surface.

A similar looking head arose on Ravana's head. Rama, endowed with a quick hand, cut off by his hand the other head.

Before cutting that second head of Ravana again another head appeared.

Rama cut off the afore said head with Indra's thunderbolt like arrows. In that way equally charming a hundred heads were struck off.

Rama, knower of all shastras, valiant, enhancer of Kausalya's joy, well versed in the use of weapons, was not able to see the end of Ravana's life. He started thinking.

'Earlier, by my arrows, Maricha was killed, Dushana and Khara were killed, Kabhanda was killed in Krauncha forest, Virada was killed in Dandaka forest. By which arrows Sala trees were cut off, mountain was broken, ocean was agitated, and Vali was killed, are wasted with Ravana, who is less brilliant in war. What is the reason?'

Even though Raghava was thinking so, yet remaining alert in the duel, rained arrows on Ravana's chest.

Valiant enemy of Raghava also seated in the chariot, rained three hundred, sixties, hundreds, and thousands of arrows.

Great war commenced in the sky, as well as on the earth, and on top of mountain again, which was horipulating,

The Devas, Danavas, Yakshasas also the fiends Demon, Nagas and Rakshasas watched the great war that continued for seven days and nights.

The fight between Rama and Ravana continued all day and night, without stopping for a moment.

Great charioteer of Indra desiring to see Rama's victory in the duel between Dasharatha's son and Rakshasa king, spoke these words.  ।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेदशोत्तरशततमस्सर्गः ।।  This is the end of one hundred and tenth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.