On hearing creator Brahma's address to Rama, fire god emerged picking auspicious Vaidehi in his arms.

Then the fire god taking human form emerged from the fire immediately,with Janaka's daughter shaking off the fire sticks.

Radiating like the rising sun, adorned with polished gold ornaments, wearing red coloured clothes, with beautiful black hair, wearing fresh flowers, being in the same young form as before, blameless Vaidehi was held in the arms of the fire god and presented to Rama.

Then the fire god who is a witness in the world, spoke to Rama," Here is your wife Vaidehi and she does not know any sin."

"Sita is of good conduct and auspicious. To you who are endowed with valour, she is faithful by speech, by intention of thought and intellect and even by glance."

"When she was lonely, piteous, having no control, Rakshasa Ravana, who was proud of his valour abducted her from the forest when no one was there."

"She was separated from you yet fully absorbed in you. She was kept in the gynaeceum secretly and guarded by frightful and ruthless Rakshasa women."

" Although Mythili was tempted, threatened also, she had set her mind on you only and not thought of that Rakshasa."

"Mythili is of untainted mind and a sinless one. Take her back without any reply, I am ordering you."

Then the supremely righteous Rama, who is good at speaking rejoiced at heart, his eyes filled with tears, thought for a moment.

Rama who is endowed with valour and firmness, and an upholder of dharma, a supreme person said to Brahma.

"That Sita is auspicious and has surely not done any sin is known to three worlds. But she lived long in the gynaeceum of Ravana."

"The people will surely say that mighty Dasharatha's son, Rama being lusty at heart has accepted Janaki without testing."

"I also know that Mythili is ever coming around me with undivided love and is devoted to me."

"Naturally she is selfeffulgent and can protect herself. Will Ravana be able to violate broad eyed Janakijust as the great ocean can't cross the bounds."

" As I am a follower of truth only, to convince the three worlds I was disregarding Vaidehi entering fire."

"It could not be possible for the evil minded Rakshasa to access or lay thoughts on Mythili who was glowing like flames of fire."

" Auspicious Sita would not have cared for the fortunes in the gynaeceum of Ravana. She is just like the radiance of the sun attached to the sun, attached to me and none other."

"Mythili is unsullied in the three worlds. Renouncing her is not feasible just as fame and as she is like my own self."

"You are worship worthy of the world and loving people advising me in this way. Your words of good advice are good to all and for me. I will certainly follow."

Illustrious Raghava, endowed with mighty prowess, who deserved happiness, spoke like this to all for the service rendered. He was praised by all for his deeds and was happy with his dear wife.  ।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेएकविंशत्युत्तरशततमस्सर्गः ।।  This is the end of one hundred and twentyone sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.