Mahendra, the tamer of demon Paka, spoke very affectionately to Rama, who stood with joined palms before Dasharatha who had returned.

"O Rama, a bull among men! Your sight was amazing, and we are happy. Please tell us the desire in your mind?"

Gratified by Mahendra's words, Raghava was very happy and pleased, submitting to him as follows.

"O Lord of gods, you are one who is good at expression. If happiness has risen in, you please make my words true."

"The Vanaras have fought for my cause and reached the abode of Yama. Make them rise up and get them back to life."

"O honourable Indra! I wish to see all those Vanaras who are separated forever from their sons, and wives for my cause, delighted."

"They were valiant and courageous and did not care for life. They did their utmost, died and fell into adversity. Purandara! Get all of them back to life."

"They were fond of doing and not counted death. I seek your grace to give a boon to relieve all of them from death."

"Bestower of honour! I wish to see the longtailed Vanaras, and Bears rid of pain and death, enriched with strength and courage."

"Let the location where Vanaras lived, have flowers, roots, fruits even though out of season and rivers with pure water."

Hearing high souled Raghava's words, Mahendra in turn replied as follows.

"Dear Rama! that which has been sought by you is great. Nothing has been revised by me in the past. Therefore, everything asked by you will be granted by this boon."

"Let those long tailed Vanaras and Bears killed by Rakshasas, whose heads and arms had been severed, duly rise to life."

The monkeys duly healed, so also from death, enriched with strength and power rose up like rising from sleep.

"Let all in that way happily get reunited and highly rejoiced, with relatives, own clan and own people get united."

The trees will be with blossoms and fruits even though it is unseasonal. The rivers will remain with waters.

All the army of Vanaras healed from the wounds, who were earlier covered with wounds and all the dead monkeys together rose up like getting up from sleep. They were amazed and started saying 'What happened'!

Seeing all of them fully accomplished, the best of Suras very affectionately praised Rama and Lakshmana and spoke.

"King, return from here to Ayodhya leaving the monkeys. Reassure Mythili, who is very dear to you and an illustrious one."

"Subduer of enemies! See your brothers, great souls Bharata and Satrughna devoted to you who are in grief due to your separation, see your mothers. Get consecrated. People will rejoice.

The thousand eyed Indra, having spoken in that way to Rama and Saumithri, delighted, they returned to heaven in an aerial car with Suras.

Then greeting all the jewels among gods present there, accompanied by brother Lakshmana, Kakuthsa Rama ordered all Vanaras to go home and rest.

Then the huge army protected by Rama and Lakshmana, were delighted and causing splendour all over. As they advanced, they shone like the night illumined by moon.  ।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेत्रयोविंशत्युत्तरशततमस्सर्गः ।।  This is the end of one hundred and twenty third sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.