Offering to Sri Rama the Pushpak decorated with flowers to sit, Vibheeshana stood at a distance and spoke.

The Rakshasa king humbly offered salutation to Raghava with joined palms, quickly approached, and said, 'What is to be done'?

Highly brilliant Raghava was thinking and spoke in a friendly manner while Lakshmana was listening closely.

"Let all the forest rangers (without exception) who made effort and fought be duly honoured with valuables and several luxuries."

"This Lanka could be won with the help of these heroes who never turned back and fought in comb at without fear of life, O Lord of Rakshasas."

"These forest rangers, all of them have struggled and accomplished success. Reward them with wealth and gems."

"These helpless monkey troops will be content with gratitude when rewarded, O respectable Vibheeshana."

"If you do so you will be called as charitable and kind, not seizing wealth and as one who has gained over senses. That is why I am telling you for so long."

"O Ruler of men, all the army will desert a king who is devoid of virtues, lowly and who is a destructor in the battlefield."

Vibheeshana honoured the Vanaras with gems and valuables, after Rama had spoken like that.

Then on seeing the monkey troops being honoured with excellent gemsRama ascended the aerial car.

﻿  Illustrious Vaidehi was abashed while she was taken in his(Hanuman’s) arms to Pushpalata while the valiant archers Lakshmana and his brother were there .

After duly honouring all the Vanaras, to Vibheeshana and highly courageous Sugriva, Kakuthsa spoke as follows.

"Bull among Vanaras! Since this work of the friend has been accomplished, you too have my permission to go where you will."

All that has to be done by an affectionate friend in advanced age has been done, for the fear of unrighteousness. Now you may advance with your army to Kishkinda.

"Vibheeshana, I would like to see you living like Indra bestowed with your own kingdom in Lanka. It will not be possible for even gods to attack you."

"I shall proceed to my father's capital, Ayodhya. You may permit me. Be auspicious. I take leave of you."

After Rama had spoken that way Sugriva, Vibheeshana, monkeys and Rakshasas saluted Rama and said as follows.

We wish to proceed with you to Ayodhya, and many wishes to go with you and range the forests and groves without anxiety.

"O Jewel among kings! We will see you being consecrated and see Kausalya, greet her and return back to our own house."

Vibheeshana and Vanaras had spoken in that way, Rama replied to Sugriva, Vibheeshana and Vanaras as follows.

"If I with my dear and near and together with you go to Ayodhya, that will give more happiness with Sita coming and with all of you."

Sugriva and the Vanaras, quickly ascended the aerial car. Vibheeshana, the king of Rakshasas and ministers all of them ascended.

Then Sugriva with Vanaras happily joined the wonderful Pushpaka, Vibheeshana and his ministers also ascended.

All the Vanaras and others having got into Kubera's Pushpaka with Rama's permission, it flew into the sky.

Delighted and thrilled, Rama was flying in the sky in Pushpaka and with shining swans, he shone like Kubera.

The Vanaras, Bears and the mighty Rakshasas also were happily and comfortably seated at good distance in the wonderful aerial car.  ।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेपञ्चविंशत्युत्तरशततमस्सर्गः ।।  This is the end of one hundred and twenty fifth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sageValmiki.