"I am hearing the good news of my Lord returning from the forest, who was living in the great forest for many years."

The saying that "If a human being lives (long), for a hundred years, he will experience joy" is true and auspicious.

"How did the alliance of monkeys happen with Rama? Where and why? I am asking you. Tell me truly."

Prince Bharata seated comfortably on kusa grass asked Hanuman for all the history that happened in the forest, wishing to hear from him.

"O Lord, mighty armed Bharata! the boons bestowed on your mother, how Sri Rama went on exile, how king Dasharatha died out of grief of son, envoys bringing you to Ayodhya, entering the kingdom, your unwillingness to accept the sovereignty, going to Chitrakuta mountain, seeking your brother noble Rama, a scourge of enemies to accept the kingdom, renouncing the kingdom by Rama, taking his sandals, and again returning here, all this is known to you."

"When you had gone away the beasts and birds scared of your army got agitated and had a doleful appearance."

"Then he entered into dreadful Dandaka forest that was devoid of people which was crowded with lions, tigers, and deer, and trampled by the elephants."



"That Viradha uplifted his arms and bent his head low screamed like an elephant. The three dug up a pit and threw him into it."

"Both the brothers Rama and Lakshmana encountered Viradha who was difficult to attack and having completed their task, reached the beautiful hermitage of Sarabhanga in the evening."



"Later came an ogre called Surpanakha close by Rama. Rama indicated to mighty Lakshmana, who got up quickly and cut off her ears and nose with a sword."

"While the great soul Rama lived at Janasthana, he killed fourteen thousand ogres".

"Rama alone in a day finished fourteen thousand Rakshasas standing alone in the forefront of the combat".

"Mighty strong heroic ogres obstructing the penance of sages living in Dandakaranya were killed by Raghava in the combat."

"In the battle Rama terminated Khara and killed his elder brother Dushana and also Trisira thereafter."

"Then Surpanakha afflicted by Rama returned to Ravana and informed. Ravana sent dreadful Rakshasa by name Maricha, who assumed the form of deer with precious stones (on body) created a desire for it in Vaidehi."

"Seeing that deer Vaidehi spoke to Rama to capture it as she desired and that it was beautiful and will make the hermitage bright."

"Rama, wielder of bow, chased the deer and followed it chasing and attacked with his arrow."

"When gentle Raghava went after the deer and Lakshmana also went from there, the ten headed Ravana entered the hermitage."



"Standing on the mountain top, the Vanaras who were like mountains in size watched the wonderful feat of the king of Rakshasas of wonderful form taking Sita."

"Then the king of Rakshasas, mighty Ravana ascended with Vaidehi into the Pushpaka, an aerial car that went swiftly at the speed of the mind and entered Lanka."

"Ravana kept Mythili in an auspicious huge mansion with golden walls and consoled her with good words."

"Vaidehi did not care to talk to the chief of Rakshasas. She ignored him like a straw and stayed in the Ashoka grove."

"Rama returned after killing the deer. On his return Kakuthsa saw in the forest, the vulture, who was dearer than his own father, killed."

"Rama with Lakshmana went about searching, ranging along the banks of Godavari among the blossomed woods."

"While going in the huge forest the valiant and truthful Rama saw a Rakshasa by the name Kabhanda. According to Kabhanda's words of advice they went to Rshyamuka mountain and met Sugriva."

"Even before they met, they had a happy feeling at heart towards each other. Earlier Sugriva was banished by his enraged brother (Vali). On mutual talk and discussion, they both developed deep friendship."

"Rama of mighty arms killed Vali of gigantic body and mighty prowess and restored Sugriva's own kingdom to him."

"Sugriva attained the kingdom and established. He promised to search with all Vanaras and promised to find Sita."

"Vanara Lord Sugriva ordered the monkeys to go to all countries and all directions and dispatched them to find Sita."

"Monkeys that went to the foremost of mountains Vindhya lost their way and a lot of time and returned with intense grief."

"Vulture king's brother called Sampathi told the Vanaras positively that Sita is dwelling in Ravana's mansion."

"To dispel the grief of the Vanaras and relieve them, I resorted to my valour and leapt a hundred yojanas."

"There at Ashoka Grove, I saw her wearing unclean silk clothes, dirty in body, devoid of happiness, determined and staying alone."

"Met that irreproachable lady like that and duly enquired everything, delighted Mythili gave me a ring with Rama's name as a token to be given to Sri Rama."

"Knowing that the most difficult task has been accomplished, again I returned and gave the valuable jewel to Rama."

"Just as an ailing man at the end of life regains hope on drinking nectar, Sri Rama also gains hope on hearing about Mythili."

"Rama made war efforts to win the war for the destruction of Lanka just as fire burns at the dissolution of the worlds and to conquer Ravana."

"Then Nala constructed the bridge, and the monkey heroes crossed the bridge."

"Prahastha was killed by Nila. Rama killed Kumbhakarna. Lakshmana killed Indrajith, the son of Ravana."

"Then to the glorious Kakuthsa, the tormentor of enemies, Indra, Yama, and Varuna bestowed boons, so also Maheswara and Brahma, Dasharatha also reached and bestowed boons on Rama. Ascetics and suras also conferred boons."

"Having received boons, Rama with the Vanaras collected together reached Kishkinda by Pushpaka aerial car."

"He reached the bank of Ganga and is staying at the hermitage of sage. Tomorrow at the time when Pushya star is in union with the moon you will be able to see Rama without any obstruction."

Then Bharata hearing the sweet words of Hanuman offered salutations for bringing joy to his mind and said that his desire has been fulfilled after a long time.  ।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेकोनत्रिंशत्युत्तरशततमस्सर्गः ।।  This is the end of one hundred and twenty ninth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.