Hearing the delightful news, Bharata of truthful prowess, the destroyer of enemies, was very happy and ordered Shatrughna.

"Let all gods in the temples of the capital be worshiped by people purifying themselves, duly adorned with fragrance and garlands."

"Let the bards well versed in singing praises, charioteers, all courtesans, in groups, artists who can play musical instruments, similarly ministers, army men, traders, service providers, Kshatriyas, brahmins so also top people, troops proceed to see the moon like face of Rama."

Shatrughna, a destroyer of enemies, hearing the words of Bharata, ordered for many divisions of labour and the courageous ones to come.

From here (Nandigrama to Ayodhya) low lying areas are to be made even and uneven areas to be levelled.

Let the ground be sprinkled with cold water and then parched grain and flowers to be sprinkled.

Let the streets of the foremost of the best cities (Ayodhya), be decorated with flags till the sun rises and houses be decorated.

Let hundreds of people decorate with fragrant garlands of five colours closely tied and decorate the royal paths.

On hearing Shatrughna's command, all the eight ministers, Dhristi, Jayanta, Vijaya, Siddhartha, Arthasadhaka, Ashoka, and Mantrapala issued forth with great joy.

Seated on top of thousands of well decorated elephants in rut, and on the best of horses, people went (to receive Rama). Female elephants had golden girths on their waist. Best charioteers on best chariots proceeded.

Chiefs on horses, champions in thousands went surrounded by thousands of foot soldiers carrying javelins, spears, and nooses.

Then all the consorts of Dasharatha, keeping Kausalya and Sumitra in front, seated in palanquin accompanied by Kaikeyi, started from Nandigram.

Then the foremost of brahmins, leaders with garlands and Modaka sweets in hand, surrounded by ministers went with righteous Bharata, accompanied by bards praising, accompanied by sounds of blowing conches and drums and greeting. Bharata was emaciated due to fastings, was desperate, wearing bark fabric and skin of antelope. The great soul Bharata, knower of righteous responsibilities, greeting, experienced great joy, on hearing about the returning of the brother. Decorated with white garlands, he carried Rama's sandals on his head. His friends accompanied him and took with him a yellow umbrella adorned with gold, worthy of kings and white whisks. Bharata went to receive Sri Rama.

The earth shook by the sounds of hooves of the horses, sounds of conches and drums, and the rattling of the chariot wheels.

Reviewing the arrangements, Bharata spoke these words to wind god's son, Hanuman.

"O monkey! Indeed, you monkey being fickle minded, hope you have not resorted to your nature. I am not seeing noble Rama, the tormentor of enemies."

And then Bharata having spoken that way, Hanuman understood the meaning of his words and spoke thus.

"By the grace of Bharadwaja, all the trees have fruits shedding sweet juice, and in bloom, the Vanaras are very delighted. The forest rangers are making terrific sounds. The tormentor of enemies, endowed with all virtues, by virtue of the boon given by Indra extended hospitality to the Vanara army. I think they are crossing the river Gomathi now."

"See the rain of dust started at Sala Forest. Vanaras are shaking the beautiful Sala grove, I think."

Pushpaka is seen at a distance, resembling the moon. This wonderful Pushpaka has been created through Brahma's mind.

"Rama's vehicle is amazing, and he got it by killing Ravana and his relatives. It shines brightly like the rising sun, and it speeds at the thought of mind. Kubera got this aerial car by Brahma's grace."

"Heroic Raghava brothers are there with Vaidehi, that highly energetic Sugriva and Rakshasa Vibheeshana also."

Then when "Sri Rama is here" was uttered a fantastic expression of joy of the women, young, youth and aged was heard, which reached the heaven.

Those people on the chariots, elephants and horses got down and saw them on the moon like Pushpaka.

Highly rejoiced, Bharata offered salutations standing as he ought to within himself and worshiped Sri Rama from a distance.

Sri Rama, elder brother of Bharata shone in the aerial car created by Brahma like another Indra.

Then Bharata offered salutations with joined palms to Sri Rama seated in the peak of Pushpaka like saluting Sun from the mountain Meru.

Then that excellent Pushpaka which had pictures of swans on it came down to the ground with Rama's permission.

Bharata of unfailing valour duly permitted to ascend Pushpaka by Sri Rama, reached Rama and once again offered salutations to Rama.

Kakuthsa Rama happily lifting up Bharata, who came into his sight after long, on to his thigh embraced him.

Then the tormentor of enemies, Bharata approached Lakshmana and then greeted Vaidehi and announced his name.

Bharata, the son of Kaikeyi thereafter embraced Sugriva, Jambavantha, Angada, Mainda, Dwivivida, Nila and Rshaba.

He embraced Sushena, Nala, Gavaksha, Gandhamadana, Sarabha, Panasa who were around.

Then he inquired about the welfare of those Vanaras who can take any form at will, who were in human form and was delighted.

And thereafter highly brilliant, foremost among the righteous, prince Bharata embraced Sugriva, the bull among Vanaras and spoke.

"Sugriva, you are the fifth brother to four of us and should have been born like that" said Bharata. One who helps becomes friend and maleficence is a sign of an enemy.

And then Bharata spoke this good word. "Luckily with your help, the very difficult task was done."

Then hero Shatrughna and Lakshmana also greeted Rama and then worshipped Sita also.

Rama reached his mother who was pale and emaciated in grief and offered salutations clasping her feet in obedience and was delighted in his mind.

Then he greeted Sumitra, and illustrious Kaikeyi also and then all the mothers and the priests who had come.

"Welcome to you mighty armed Rama, enhancer of Kausalya's joy" saying so citizens of the city spoke with folded hand s greeting Rama.

The citizens in thousands greeting Rama, elder brother of Bharata lifting up their hand s with folded palms seemed like lotus buds.

Taking the sandals given to Bharata, the knower of dharma put on the sandals on Rama's feet by himself.

Bharata then greeted Rama with folded palms, spoke saying, "this kingdom and everything held in trust by me is returned to you."

Today my life is fulfilled, my wish is completed. I am seeing you returned to Ayodhya again as king of this kingdom.

You may review your treasury, granary, palaces, army. Everything has increased tenfold by me by virtue of your brilliance.

Seeing Bharata, the lover of his brother, who spoke like that, the Vanaras, Rakshasas, and Vibheeshana shed tears.

Then rejoiced Raghava took Bharata on his lap and flew to Bharata's hermitage with the army.

Raghava alighted from the top of the Pushpaka on reaching the hermitage of Bharata and stood on ground.

Then Rama told Pushpaka that he was permitted to go to God Vysravana.

That aerial car duly permitted by Rama rose up to go to Kubera and set out in the northern direction and flew.

That wonderful Pushpaka received from Rakshasa impelled by Rama's order speedily went to Kubera.

Accompanied by his army, valiant Sri Rama greeted the family priest (Vasishta) who was his own form, sitting on the splendid seat by the side, by holding his feet, just as Lord of heaven Indra would hold the feet of Brhaspati.  ।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेत्रिंशत्युत्तरशततमस्सर्गः ।।  This is the end of one hundred and thirtieth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.