Bharata, the enhancer of Kaikeyi's joy, of unfailing valour, with folded palms on head submitted to his elder brother.

"This kingdom was bestowed on me and my mother. I return it back to you now again."

"I am not able to bear the heavy burden transferred to me any more like a young ox can't bear like a bull.

"If the kingdom containing vulnerable points is not protected on all sides, it can't stand, just as a strong rush of water can be prevented from breach only by constructing a dam.

"O Rama! Donkey can't run like horse crow can't run like swan. I am not able to bear the burden of kingdom like you, O tormentor of enemies."

"If for example you have planted a tree in your own house, it becomes huge and difficult to climb in spite of a large trunk, many branches and after flowering does not yield fruits and is withered, the person who planted will not enjoy the fruit. In that way O mighty armed Rama, you are the ruler of the people, if you would not take care of us, your dependants, I solicit you ought to understand what I mean.

"Raghava, let you be consecrated in the afternoon and the world will see you dazzling in brilliance like the sun today."

May you wake up to the sounds of musical instruments and the tinkling of ornaments worn around the waist and anklets and sweet sounds of singing.

As long as the stellar sphere goes round, and as long as the earth revolves around that long you enjoy the rulership of the world."

Hearing Bharata's words, the conqueror of enemies, Rama said 'Be it so'. Then Bharata took the auspicious seat.

Then at the command of Shatrughna's words, experts with hand work (barbers) who had soft skills quickly surrounded Raghava.

Bharata had his bath first, and mighty Lakshmana, Sugriva the monkey king, and Vibheeshana the Rakshasa king followed him. Sri Rama removed the matted hair, had bath, adorned with colourful garlands, and daubed with sandal paste and clothed in exquisite robes stood glowing and shining.

Then valiant and prosperous, Shatrughna, who is an enhancer of the glory of Ikshvaku race decorated Sri Rama and Lakshmana (duly with ornaments).

Then all the nobleminded Dasharatha's wives themselves decorated Sita beautifully.

The very delighted Kausalya, lover of her sons started making effort to decorate the wives of all Vanaras in a splendid manner.

Then Sumantra the charioteer, commanded by Shatrughna came there with all parts of the chariot decorated and yoked.

Seeing the wonderful chariot like the radiance of the planet sun, mighty armed Rama the conqueror of hostile enemies ascended.

Sugriva and Hanuman having bathed wore sparkling earrings, clothed in heavenly robes vied with Mahendra in splendour, started.

Sugriva's wife and Sita decked with all kinds of ornaments and earrings, enthused to see the city, started.

At Ayodhya also, king Dasharatha's ministers, priests started to Vasishta and thought of the required arrangements.

Ashoka, Vijaya, Siddhartha, collected together and started consulting with each other for the growth of Rama and the City.

For the success of the great soul Rama's consecration, whatever was auspicious, all that ought to be done as he deserves.

All those ministers, priests thus communicating with each other, speedily set forth to have a glance at Sri Rama.

Like the thousand eyed Indra seated in the excellent chariot yoked to green horses, the sinless Rama departed to the city.

Bharata held the reins, Shatrughna took hold of the parasol, Lakshmana standing in front held the fan, and the Rakshasa king Vibheeshana held a white whisk which was like a moon for driving the air.

Then the host of sages, Rudras and gods from the heaven started praising Rama with sweet sounding chanting.

Then resplendent Sugriva, the bull among Vanaras, ascended the mountain like elephant by the name Satrumjaya.

Assuming human semblance, the Vanaras adorned with ornaments ascended nine thousand elephants and departed.

Sri Rama the tiger among men went accompanied by sounds of blasts of conches and shouts and roll of drums along the rows of mansions in the city.

Then they saw all those who had gone to Ayodhya coming in advance in accordance with tradition, to receive Rama, the great car warrior, who was shining brightly advancing by the chariot.

They were blessing Sri Rama in turn and Rama responded to them very happily. Surrounded by brothers and all followed Rama the great soul.

Surrounded by ministers, brahmins and common people, glorious Rama shone brightly like the moon surrounded by stars.

He went forward surrounded by bands, trumpets, wooden cymbals and swastikas and very happily singing auspicious festive songs.

Taking yellow rice (rice smeared with turmeric) appearing like gold, cows, virgin women, brahmins with Modakas in hand went before Rama.

Rama narrated about his friendship with Sugriva and the distinct performance of Hanuman and Vanaras to the ministers.

Hearing about the action of Vanaras and the strength of Rakshasas, the citizens of Ayodhya were astonished.

Sri Rama narrated about Vibheeshana's friendship to the ministers. Splendorous Rama then entered Ayodhya filled with very happy people accompanied by Vanaras.

The citizens of Ayodhya held the flags up in every house. Thereupon Rama reached the beautiful home of his father, the abode of the Ikshvaku dynasty.

And thereafter prince Rama, the joy of Raghus, the great soul reached father's mansion and then to Kausalya's and to Sumitra, to Kaikeyi and greeted them. He then spoke meaningful words to virtuous Bharata in a sweet tone.

Let the splendid, excellent mansion attached to Ashoka grove, encrusted with cat's eye gems and pearls be placed at the disposal of Sugriva.

Then that upright Bharata hearing the words of Rama taking the hand of Sugriva led him to that temple like abode.

Then as commanded by Shatrughna, people taking glowing oil lamps and coverlets for the couches quickly entered the palace.

Highly brilliant Sugriva said to Bharata, "Let envoys be sent for the consecration of Rama."

Sugriva instantly gave four golden pots decorated well to the four Vanara leaders.

Sugriva gave four pots to the four of the Vanaras to get them filled with the water of the four oceans and get them by early morning and said to await for him.

Having spoken like that by Sugriva, the Vanaras of mountainlike forms fled like Garuda into the sky quickly.

Jambavan, Hanuman, Vegadarsa and Rshaba brought pots of water from the seas. Another five hundred monkeys brought five hundred pots from five hundred rivers of the country. Jambavan richly endowed with courage brought in a pot encrusted with all kinds of gems. Sushena brought water from the eastern sea.

Rshaba quickly brought water from the southern sea in a golden pot covered with sandal paste.

Gavaya, an expert like WindGod brought cold water from the abode of Varuna in the west, in a pot encrusted with gems.

Nala who vied with Garuda in speed, a righteous one, endowed with all virtues quickly brought water from the north.

Then seeing the water brought by the monkeys for Rama's consecration Shatrugna along with ministers placed them at the disposal of the supreme priest along with friends.

Then accompanied by brahmins, sage Vasishta, active though aged, asked Sita and Sri Rama to occupy the plank made with full of precious stones.

Eight sages, Vasishta, Vama Deva, Jabali, Kasyapa, Katyayana, Suyajna, Gautama and Vijaya consecrated Sri Rama, the tiger among men, with pure fragrant waters as the Vasus consecrated the thousand eyed Indra.

First by priests, followed by brahmins, virgin women, so also ministers, merchants, warriors consecrated. Those who stood in the sky, the gods, the rulers of the four quarters, and all gods consecrated by sprinkling water containing medicinal herbs. All were very delighted.

In the past, Manu was consecrated with a crown encrusted with gems crafted by Brahma and it was adorned at consecration by successive kings. After the consecration, Rama was dazzling seated on a throne made of several kinds of gems as per tradition. The council hall was also made of gold with charming pictures and looked splendid. The great soul Raghava was crowned and adorned with ornaments by Vasishta and the priests.

Shatrughna held white auspicious parasol, Sugriva the Vanara Lord held a white whisk, Vibheeshana the Lord of Rakshasas held a white whisk shining like the moon.

The WindGod prompted by deity Indra presented a dazzling golden garland of hundred flowers to Raghava.

Urged by Indra the wind god gave a dazzling pearls chain intercepted by several kinds of gems and precious stones to the ruler of the world.

The Gandharvas from among the gods sang and Apsara groups danced for Rama's consecration.

At the time of celebration of Rama's coronation, earth became green with crops, trees bore fruits and filled with flowers which spread fragrance.

Sri Rama, the bull among men gave first, a hundred thousand cows with just born calves to hundred thousand brahmins.

Raghava again gave brahmins thirty crores of golden coins and different kinds of ornaments and clothes.

Sri Rama gave a wonderful golden garland with a stretch of gems tied to it which was dazzling like the sun's rays to Sugriva.

Very lovingly Rama gave Angada the son of Vali, wonderful armlets encrusted with cat's eye stones and precious gems.

Rama gave Sita an unsurpassed pearl chain (given to him by the wind god) encrusted with the best of gems and corals wonderfully shining like moonbeams. And Sita looking at Rama presented that immaculate wonderful pearl chain, and splendid clothes with some ornaments to Hanuman.

Removing the pearl chain from her neck, Janaki looked at all the monkeys as well as her husband again and again.

Seeing Janaki looking at him, Rama who could read her mind, and said" Lovely Sita, Beautiful young lady, give the pearl chain to one with whom you are pleased." Sita you may give the chain to one in whom you always found to have brilliance, determination, fame, dexterity, capacity, modesty, prudence, virility, prowess, and intelligence always.

Blackeyed Sita, gave that chain to Hanuman, the bull among Vanaras who shone like a mountain behind white silver like cloud.

Then Sri Rama, the tormentor of enemies, the ruler of the earth looking at Mainda, Dwivida and Neela presented articles according to their desires. For the aged among the Vanaras and the foremost Vanaras, he gave ornaments and garments duly as much as they deserved and worshipped.

And thereafter Vibheeshana, Sugriva, Hanuman, Jambavan, all Vanara chiefs of unwearied action having received gifts, abundant gems, and desired objects as they deserved from Rama. They worshipped Rama and very delighted at heart went to their respective places.

All the high souled bulls among Vanaras, lauded by the ruler of the earth departed to Kishkinda after seeing the great celebration.

Sugriva, the foremost of the Vanaras having seen Rama's coronation and been honoured, entered Kishkinda.

Vibheeshana, the bull of Rakshasas, of great fame and a righteous king, having received family fortune departed to Lanka.

Highly renowned and generous Raghava, putting an end to enemies ruled the entire kingdom with great joy. He said to Lakshmana who was a lover of duty and knower of dharma.

"Lakshmana! You are a knower of dharma and a lover of dharma. Prior to my consecration, this kingdom was ruled by former kings, fathers, and forefathers also with the help of the army. You bear the burden equally with me by being installed as Prince Regent", said Rama.

When Saumithri was compelled repeatedly to accept the position of Prince Regent by the high soul great Rama, he had not accepted. Rama consecrated Bharata as Prince Regent.

Rama, the son of Dasharatha, had performed many a time Pundarika, Aswamedha, Vajapeya and several other yajnas and propitiated gods.

Raghava in the ten thousand years of his rule performed hundred horse sacrifices with excellent horses and gave donations liberally.

Sri Rama whose arms reached unto knees, endowed with broadchest and stupendous glory, ruled this earth with Lakshmana as his follower.

Righteous Rama also, having inherited the kingdom, conducted several sacrifices with brothers, friends and relatives.

While Rama was ruling there was no lamentation of widows (over their loss), fear of cruel animals, or fear of disease.

There were no thieves, indeed there was no loss, aged did not perform obsequies (no deaths in the young population) for the young and no harm to people.

All were happy, and followed the righteous path, looking at Rama alone and no one hit another.

While Rama was ruling for thousands of years, people were blessed with thousands of sons and lived free from trouble and sorrow.

While Rama was ruling the kingdom, everything was Rama, Rama, and Rama. People spoke stories of Rama and the world was resonating with Rama.

The trees were always in bloom, and always bore fruits. Clouds sent rain when desired. People lived with delightful feelings.

While Rama ruled brahmins, kshatriyas, vaisyas and sudras were free from avarice, were engaged in their own avocations and delighted. People remained righteous, pious, and never told lies.

All were endowed with signs of good culture, given to righteous behaviour. Rama ruled the kingdom for ten thousand years with brothers.

He who reads, listens to this first epic, a noble text composed by Valmiki will be blessed, attain fame, enjoy long life and victory in this world and will be rid of sins.

On hearing about Rama's consecration, in this world, one who is seeking sons will get sons, one who is desirous of wealth will attain wealth, kings will overcome enemies and conquer earth.

Women listening to Ramayana will have Kausalya's Rama, Sumitra's Lakshmana, Kaikeyi's Bharata as living sons and will be always happy and blessed with sons and grandsons.

He who listens to Ramayana, the story of Rama of unwearied action will be victorious and blessed with long life.

He who listens with devotion, this epic composed by sage Valmiki in the past, will conquer anger and overcome difficulties.

Whoever listens to this epic written in the past by sage Valmiki will be united with relations and rejoice with them.

Those who listen well to Ramayana will obtain all boons here in this world and all gods will be pleased.

The god who removes obstacles will be staying in peace in the house where Ramayana is there. The kings listening to Ramayana will conquer the world and those gone out of home will return back safe.

Women listening to Ramayana prior to pregnancy will deliver sons. This ancient epic if worshipped or read, one will get rid of all sins and attain long life.

A kshatriya should always offer salutations with his head bent down before listening to Ramayana from a brahmin. Such a kshatriya will obtain kingship and also beget sons in future. There is no doubt.

Rama is said to be ever pleased with him who listens or reads the Ramayana daily. Foremost of Raghus, the mighty armed Rama is eternal Lord Vishnu himself. He is Hari, the ruler Narayana and Lakshmana is Sesha.

This way Ramayana is the ancient narration. Read it daily with trust and devotion. You be auspicious and let the strength of Vishnu grow in you.

By grasping and listening to Ramayana, all gods will be delighted, ancestors will be pleased.

Residence in heaven is assured for those who transcribe this Ramayana with devotion and full of meaning, composed by the great sage.

Listening to this great auspicious epic will result in the growth of the family, excellent women, augmentation of wealth and grains and comfort on the earth and accomplishment of one's objectives.

If the narrative of Ramayana is regularly heard it is auspicious and beneficial for those desiring long life, intelligence, purity, fame, health, wisdom, friendliness, and vitality.  ।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येचतुर्विंशत्सहस्रिकायांसम्हितायां  श्रीयुद्धकाण्डेश्रीरामपट्टाभिषेकोनामएकत्रिंशत्युत्तरशततमस्सर्गः ।।  This is the end of one hundred thirtyone sarga of Yuddha Kanda, of Sri Rama's coronation of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.