Then Raghava the destroyer of foes, offered his obeisance turning his face towards east, spread the kusa grass mat on the seashore and lay down resting his head upon his shoulders like a coiled serpent.

The shoulders that have been adorned with the best of gold, pearl and coral ornaments, were besmeared many times by supreme women.

The very charming shoulders, smeared with sandal paste and Agaru fragrance emitting the brilliance of the rising Sun.

(The shoulders) which resembled the coils of Takshaka (in chubbiness) a principal serpent, was graced by Sita while in bed, was bathed by the best of women with waters of Ganga.

The shoulders were long like the union of Yugas, which brought grief to the enemies in war and delight to the friends, and like the earth bound by the ocean on all sides.

The mighty armed Rama's arms were hardened like that of iron bars by the large number of arrows received by the left arm and strained by giving thousands of cows as gifts by the right arm. Rama was determined now to cross over the great ocean or meet the sea with death and lay down subdued and restrained like a sage.

As Rama kept himself alert with a vow and lay on the kusa grass m at spread on the ground, three nights rolled fast.

Rama, a lover of dharma, who had political foresight, spent three nights waiting upon the ocean, the Lord of rivers.

Though Rama remained selfrestrained and respected the ocean well according to propriety, the ocean was dull and did not show its real form.

Enraged at the ocean, Rama's eyes turned red. He went near Lakshmana who was endowed with auspicious marks and thus addressed.

"Why is it that the ocean does not show up to me? Indeed, calmness, forbearance, straightforwardness, politeness of speech are all attributes of virtuous qualities and one without these attributes are considered incapable."

"Indeed, the world treats one with respect, who praises himself, as an impudent one, an unchaste one and one who goes about with a rod of punishment (not the one who is virtuous)."

"O Lakshmana Neither fame nor popularity can win a battle front in this world."

"Saumithri Witness the crocodiles shattered by my ruthless arrows jumping and floating in the ocean with water splashed on all sides."

"Lakshmana See here the coils of serpents, huge snakes, fish and large sea elephants cut into pieces by me."

"I shall make the ocean dry up with its shells and conchs, fishes and crocodiles in this great combat."

"By my being tolerant, this ocean treats me to be incapable. Endowed with such qualities of forbearance, I will show the people (ocean)."

"The ocean has not shown his own form to me. O Lakshmana Get the bow and venomous snake like arrows, I will dry up the ocean and the Vanaras can walk by foot and go."

"(The ocean) Having made me angry, now I will torment the ocean even though it is imperturbable and has its limits. I will torment the ocean with its thousands of waves and mighty demons by my arrows and make the ocean cross its boundary."

Having spoken like that, Rama with his flaming red eyes seemed like the flame at the end of the universe and unassailable.

Bending the terrific bow, he released frightful arrows like Indra (who released thunderbolts) who performed a hundred sacrifices.

Glowing in brilliance like flame, the arrows of the best among the arrows pierced like snakes into the water of the ocean.

Then the ocean seemed terrible with the fish and crocodiles rushing out with the speed of water and powerful wind.

With the movement of the sea water filled with the conchs and shells suddenly terrific smoke whirling round and rising played around.

Those snakes with blazing hoods and glowing eyes residing in the underworld and the demons became oppressed.

Thousands of waves of the ocean rose like the peaks of Vindhya and Mandara mountains.

The waves rose up tossing and whirling about. The agitated Nagas and Rakshasas were thrown up by a highly disturbed ocean that produced a great sound.

Then Saumithri got up and rushed very fast to Rama who was stretching his bow exceedingly and breathing hard in anger and said, 'no more, no more' and seized the bow.  ।।इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेएकविंशस्सर्गः ।।  This is the end of the twenty first sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.