The tenheaded Ravana, having fallen under the sway of death could not tolerate Malyavatha's words of advice.

Then Ravana who had come under the influence of anger, knitting the brows of his face rolling his eyes said to Malyavan.

"Harsh and not wellmeaning words have been uttered by you taking the enemy's side. I will not listen to what you said earlier."

"For what reason do you say that a wretched human being, alone, forsaken by a father who has taken asylum in the forest, who is taking the help of vanaras is capable?"

"The Lord of Rakshasas is a terror to all including the Devas and am endowed with all kinds of prowess and efficiency. Why do you think I am deficient?"

"I suspect that out of hatred towards me, you are speaking such harsh words to a hero encouraged by the enemy."

"Which person who has learned the truth of sastras will address such harsh words to one in power without instigation?"

"Sita who is like Lakshmi without the lotus has been brought from the forest. Why would I return her for the fear of Rama?"

"Indeed, in a short while crores of Vanaras, Sugriva and also Lakshmana and Raghava will be killed by me. Oh!"

As even gods will not with stand Ravana in war, of whom Ravana will be afraid of in a duel.

"I would break my head into two also but not bend my head to anyone. It is my weakness. It is hard to overcome nature."

"Rama has constructed a bridge by chance and because of that you are fearing what wonder is there in it?"

"Rama having crossed the sea with his Vanara army will not go back with life. It is true."

When Ravana was abashed and speaking in that way realizing that he is angry, Malyavan did not reply feeling shy.

Malyavan offered blessings to the king for success in accordance with tradition left to his house.

Ravana then held discussions with his companions and ministers and made unequalled arrangements for (safety of) Lanka.

Ravana posted Prahastha surrounded by many Rakshasas at the east gate, and the Rakshasas of great prowess, Mahaparsva and Mahodara at the southern gate, and like that Mahamaya and Indrajith, his own son at the western gate.

Ravana posted Suka and Sarana at the north gate of Lanka and himself reached there and told the ministers that he would be there.

In the middle of the city, he placed Virupaksha, a Rakshasa endowed with extraordinary strength and many more Rakshasas.

The best of Rakshasas under the sway of destiny, having been ordered in that way in Lanka, Ravana felt as though he had accomplished the task.

There after making arrangements adequately for the protection of Lanka, taking leave of ministers who offered blessings for his prosperity and uttered words of benediction for his success Ravana entered the inner chambers of the palace.  ।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेषटित्रंशस्सर्गः ।।  This is the end of the thirty sixth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.