Thus, as the Vanaras and Rakshasas were battling, the Sun began to set, which is not favourable to the life of Vanaras.

Then Vanaras and dreadful Rakshasas being strongly inimical to each other started the night battle wishing victory.

In the fierce darkness that prevailed, monkeys hit monkeys thinking to be Rakshasas and Rakshasas hit Rakshasas thinking to be Vanaras (not knowing in darkness) hit each other.

"Strike", "Tear", "Why are you running away?" were the kind of tumultuous echo heard in the darkness of the night. In that darkness the dark complexioned Vanaras and Rakshasas covered with golden armour in the night seemed like shining herbs of the forest in the mountain.

In that pitch darkness, which was difficult even to move, the Rakshasas overcome by anger and lost senses were wandering devouring the monkeys.

The mighty strong Vanaras, terribly angry at the Rakshasas sprang up to the sky, and tore with their sharp teeth, the horses of Rakshasas decked with golden ornaments pervading like fire in the battle.

Having lost senses in fury they dragged the elephants, those mounted upon them, and the chariots decorated with posts and flags and tore them with their teeth.

Then Rama as well as Lakshmana with their venomous snakelike arrows killed both visible and invisible principal Rakshasas.

Then the dust rose from the ground pulverised the horses' hooves and crushed by the chariot wheels, filling the ears and eyes of those in war.

In that way as the war was going on, and rivers of blood flowing with the terrific noise it made hair stand on end.

There arose wonderful sounds of musical instruments, the sounds of kettle drums, wooden drums, mixed with conchs and flutes.

There from the battlefield arose the roaring sounds of wounded and appeased Rakshasas and Vanaras.

There with warriors of Vanaras wounded by javelins, tridents and axes, and the Rakshasas of mountain size who could change their form at will, the battlefield was muddy, and wet with blood flowing and difficult to reach.

Like the dreadful night for all beings, difficult to spend, as if it were a dissolution, destructive to Vanaras and Rakshasas.

Thereafter in that exceedingly fearsome dark night in the battlefield highly delighted Rakshasas assailed Rama with a rain of arrows.

The thundering noise of the angry Rakshasas rushing towards Rama was like the seven seas rising to flow into the ocean.

On Rama striking with the six best of shafts like flames in a time of twinkling of eyelids, the six Rakshasas, Yamasatru, Mahaparva, Mahodara, Mahakaya, and Vajradamshtra found it difficult to overcome. Along with the two Suka, Saranas all of them were struck by Rama's fire like arrows in their vital parts and escaped with leftover life.

Mighty Rama with his shafts that were like flames of fire, decorated with gold, brightened in all directions.

Those fierce Rakshasas who stood in front of Rama were destroyed like fireflies fallen in fire.

By the rain of thousands of golden feathered arrows, the night appeared as if illumined by fireflies and like a wonderful autumnal night.

The night which was fierce appeared more dreadful with the loud noise of Rakshasas and Vanaras.

Resounding with the sound rising all over the caves of Trikuta mountain echoed and it looked as if the mountain was responding to someone's call.

The dark complexioned Rakshasas of gigantic body, who were highly energetic were held tightly by the monkeys with black faces and long tails and allowed them to be devoured.

Angada who was determined to kill the enemies, in no time wounded Ravana's charioteer and also the horses.

As the violent war was going on, the great cheat, Indrajith disappeared from there as Angada had already killed his horses and charioteer.

Angada who was worthy of worship, was praised by even the sages, all deities and both Rama and Lakshmana for his action.

All beings present in war were aware of Indrajith's deeds. Therefore, they were gratified to see him defeated.

Thereafter, Sugriva, Vibheeshana and all monkeys gratified with Angada's deed cried out saying "Excellent, Well done".

Then Indrajith of terrible deeds defeated by Angada in the comb at became terribly angry.

That sinful son of Ravana, who is capable of encountering rising up remained invisible and shot sharp arrows.

The angry Rakshasa (remaining invisible) pierced arrows full of serpents all over the body of Rama and Lakshmana.

The Rakshasa waging war in invisible form with all beings by his supernatural powers fought with both the brothers, Rama and Lakshmana and bound them in a network of arrows.

Then the Vanaras beheld the two brothers, tigers among men bound forcibly by the angry Rakshasas like venomous monkeys.

Then the evil minded Rakshasa king's son, being incapable of getting bound in visible form, by remaining invisible, bound them deceitfully.  ।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेचतुश्चत्वारिंशस्सर्गः ।।  This is the end of the forty fourth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.