After accomplishing the task Ravana's son entered Lanka while the bull among monkeys guarded Raghava staying around.

Having arranged the army in place, Hanuman, Angada, Nila, Kumuda, Nala, Gava, Sarabha, Gandhamadana, Sanuprastha, Jambavan, Rshaba, Rambha, Satavali, Pruthu, who are always alert were holding trees and looking above, on either side and in all directions and guarded Rama. Whenever there was movement of even a blade of grass, they thought that it might be Rakshasa.

Ravana was also content to send away his son Indrajith and calls for the Rakshasa woman, caretaker of Sita.

The rakshasi and also Trijata came and waited there by the order. Lowly Rakshasa, Ravana, full of joy addressed rakshasi.

"Rama and Lakshmana are killed by Indrajith in war. Take Vaidehi in the aerial car and show her."

"That husband with whose support she was proud and not yielding to me is unconscious along with his brother who have been killed," said Ravana.

"Mythili, rid of sorrow and free from perturbation, giving up hope (of Rama) can wait upon me adorned with all kinds of jewels."

Ravana thought that the broad eyed Sita coming to conclusion in course of time that Rama has gone along with Lakshmana, rid of hope, with no other haven, will seek him on her own accord.

The evil minded Rakshasas listening to Ravana's words went to the aerial car.

Thereafter, by Ravana's order the Rakshasas went with the aerial car to Mythili in the Ashoka Garden.

Then the Rakshasas took the aerial car near Sita who was overcome by her husband's grief.

Thereafter the Rakshasas along with Trijata went to Sita and made her ascend Pushpaka to see Rama and Lakshmana.

The Lord of Rakshasas rejoiced and went to Lanka decorated with flags and posts proclaiming that Rama and Lakshmana were killed by Indrajith in war.

Sita and Trijata flying on the Pushpaka saw all the fallen Vanara army.

Sita beheld extremely happy Rakshasas, and grief stricken Vanaras, in great agony near Rama and Lakshmana.

Thereafter Sita beheld both Rama and Lakshmana lying on the bed of arrows, unconscious, struck by arrows, with shields of darts, arrows with feathers, all limbs wounded with shattered armour, bows and reeds.

Seeing the gallant bulls among men, the two brothers with big eyes, the two heroes like sons of fire god lying on the bed of arrows in such a state, Sita was filled with intense sorrow and pity burst into tears being affected extremely.

Janaka's daughter of beautiful limbs and dark eyes, seeing her husband and Lakshmana, both powerful ones rolling, roared aloud.

As tears were rolling down her eyes, beholding the brothers who were equal to gods in their glory, suspecting them to be dead Sita spoke these words  ।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेसप्तचत्वारिंशस्सर्गः ।।  This is the end of the forty seventh sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.