Sugriva, the very powerful one and all the best of Vanaras stood immersed in sorrow surrounding the great sons of Dasaratha, who were lying on the ground bound by a network of arrows like serpents, sighing, bodies covered with blood.

In the meantime, Rama, although bound, being a man of fortitude established in spiritual discipline, returned to consciousness.

There after seeing the piteous countenance of his brother, bound, and injured, Rama lamented.

"Of what purpose is my life when I behold my brother lying lifeless in war? What do I have with Sita? Or even with my life?"

"In a mortal world I can look for a woman like Sita but not possible to find a helpful and capable brother."

"If Sumithra's dear son gets merged with the five elements, I will give up my life as the Vanaras are beholding."

"What can I say to mother Kausalya, Kaikeyi and mother Sumithra waiting to see her son?"

"If I go to Ayodhya without him, how can I console Sumithra crying aloud like a female osprey?"

"How can I return bereft of Lakshmana who went with me to the forest? What can I tell Satrughna, also the Bharata of great fame?"

"If Sumithra asks me, I can't endure. I cannot bear it. I shall give up my body, my life here itself."

"What a pity! Me of sinful deeds and not a noble one, because of whose action Lakshmana's life having departed and lying on the bed of arrows."

"You were always comforting me when I was sad. Now however much I am grieved, ceased of life you cannot comfort me."

"You, who have struck down many Rakshasas in war, are lying unconscious on the same ground struck by arrows."

"Lying on the bed of arrows in the network of arrows, blood flowing out from the body he remains shining like the setting sun."

"Struck in the vital parts by the arrows, it is not possible for you to speak, but your anguish is indicated in your looks."

"This Lakshmana glowing in brightness, travelled with me following me in the forest. In the same way I shall follow him to the abode of death."

"He who was liked by relatives, was following ignoble me ever devoutly has reached this state."

"Indeed, heroic Lakshmana never uttered an unpalatable word. I do not remember him speaking harsh words even when he was deeply provoked."

"He who, in one go released five hundred arrows (with two hand s) is therefore superior to Kartaveerya (with thousand hands) releasing the same arrows."

"He, who could destroy Indra's arrows also deserves to be on Indra's bed, is lying on the ground, killed."

"I have not made Vibheeshana as the king of Rakshasas. Because of that untruth utterance they want to consume me, no doubt."

"Sugriva! You return back from here now. Strong Ravana will chase you because of my not being here."

"Sugriva! Return back from here along with the army keeping Angada in front, even Neela and Nala. Cross the ocean."

"O King of Bears! King of Golangulas! Difficult action has been done by you and others in war. I am pleased with Hanumantha's action."

"Formidable war was done by Angada, Mainda, Dwivida, and by all the Vanaras, Kesari and Sampathi."

"Gava, Gavaksha, Sarabha and others even Vanaras have done war sacrificing their lives for me."

"Sugriva! It is not possible for human beings to overcome God (destiny). O scorcher of enemies! Sugriva, my best friend, you have all done righteously that which is not possible."

"O Bulls among Vanaras! All of you should go permitted by me. You have done friend's work. You may go where you wish to go. I permit said Rama."

All the Vanaras started shedding tears from their tawny eyes on listening to the lamentation of Rama.

Thereafter, Vibheeshana, settling all the army, hastened to reach Raghava with a mace.

Seeing Vibheeshana resembling a dark mountain, thinking him to be Indrajith, all the Vanaras ran from there.  ।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेएकोनपञ्चाशस्सर्गः ।।  This is the end of the forty ninth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.