Extremely brilliant and mighty Sugriva looking at the army of Vanaras said, "Why are you worried like a boat tossed by wind in water?"

On hearing Sugriva's question, Angada the son of Vali said, "Did you not see Dasaratha's sons Rama and chariot warrior Lakshmana, the great souls lying on a bed of arrows bathed in blood?"

Then Vanara king Sugriva looking at Angada said, "I do not think that the Vanaras running like this is not without any cause. Maybe out of fear of some reason ahead."

"Here, the distressed Vanaras with sad faces, their eyes downcast, are fleeing in all directions abandoning their arms."

"Without waiting to look back at others, not shy to see one another, the Vanaras are distancing themselves from those fallen and are seen fleeing."

In the meantime, heroic Vibheeshana holding mace came to Sugriva and Rama and cheered with victory.

Beholding Vibheeshana, the Vanaras fled, said Sugriva to the great Jambavan who stood near him.

"Vibheeshana has come here. Beholding him the foremost of the Vanaras fleeing suspecting him to be the son of Ravana."

"Call them back who are running in different directions quickly. Tell them Vibheeshana has come here."

Sugriva having spoken in that way, the king of Bears, Jambavan restored the confidence of Vanaras.

Having heard Jambavan, all the Vanaras finally shed their fear and returned to see Vibheeshana.

On seeing the body of Rama and Lakshmana fully covered by arrows, Vibheeshana also became piteous and sad.

Vibheeshana, wetting his hands with water cleaned the eyes of Rama and Lakshmana. Tormented with pain he cried aloud.

"Both the princess, who are endowed with good nature, and power are fond of combat. The Rakshasas have reduced them to this state by their deceitful ways."

"The princess who were guileless in their prowess were cheated by my evil minded and stupid son of my brother by his crooked thinking and cheating."

"Pierced with arrows, fully covered with blood, the bodies of the two princes appear like porcupines sleeping on the ground."

"These two bulls among men of great valour and fame whose refuge was sought by me are lying asleep wounded all over and limbs broken."

"Having lost my life ambition for the kingdom, frustrated I am. My enemy Ravana, having succeeded in his vow, did this deed."

To Vibheeshana who was lamenting in that way, Sugriva, who was endowed with good qualities embraced him and spoke.

"O righteous one! there is no doubt that you will attain the kingdom of Lanka. Ravana and his sons will not attain what they desire."

"Both these heroes Raghava and Lakshmana wounded and pained having shaken off from their unconscious state will kill Ravana and his army in war."

Thus, consoling and pacifying, the Rakshasa, Vibheeshana in that manner, Sugriva turned to his uncle Sushena and spoke.

"On regaining consciousness, take the brothers Rama and Lakshmana, the tamers of enemies to Kishkinda accompanied by the heroic monkey army."

"On killing Ravana and his sons along with his kin, I will on my part also bring Mythili just as Indra recovered his prosperity."

Hearing the words of Vanara Lord, Sushena spoke about the fierce and great war that he had experienced between Devas and asuras.

"Then the Rakshasas adept in using arms went about agitating concealing themselves, attacking Devatas who were learned in using arms."

"Brhaspati, the priest restored the wounded and lifeless, unconscious by means of reciting mantras, prayers and treatment by herbs."

"Let Sampati and Panasa go quickly to the milky ocean in a swift phase to get those medicines."

"Those monkeys only know the supreme medicine available in the mountains. They have to get Sanjeevakarani and Visalyakarani known to Brahma."

"There, where the milky ocean, the foremost of oceans, was churned, two mountains have risen by the name Chandra and Drona. The supreme herbs of medicine are present there."

"Both the mountains are well known. Deities have kept the herbal medicine there. Let the son of wind god, Hanuman proceed."

In the mean while winds blew, clouds also rose up, water in the ocean was scattered about by the wind and lightning appeared in the sky.

All the huge trees of the island were broken by the flutter of the wings (of Garuda) and fell into the salt water of the ocean.

All the serpents and sea monsters inhabiting there terrified at Garuda went quickly into the salty waters of the ocean.

Then all the Vanaras perceived Garuda endowed with mighty prowess, the son of Vinatha blazing like fire.

Seeing the noble Rama and Lakshmana bound by the serpents in the form of arrows (released by Indrajith), the serpents fled.

Thereafter Garuda paying his respects to the noble Rama and Lakshmana, touching their feet, wiped their face which shone like the moon.

Caressed by Garuda, both their bodies were cleared of wounds instantly shone like gold and turned bright.

Their brilliance, prowess, daring courage, intelligence, memory, and great qualities got manifested many folds.

Raising up both the princes who were extraordinarily brilliant and equalled Indra, Garuda embraced Rama joyfully and thus spoke.

"By your kindness, we have overcome this calamity caused by Ravana's son and regained our strength as before."

"For me to meet you is like meeting my father Dasaratha and grandfather, Aja. My heart rejoices."

"Who are you, richly endowed with charming appearance, smeared with unguents adored in dust free garments, wearing beautiful ornaments?"

To Rama whose eyes were filled with joyful tears, Vinatha, the king of birds, full of brightness and strength said.

"O Kakuthsa! I am Garuthman, your dear friend and your outer breath. I reached here to help you."

"For the demons endowed with great strength and of mighty valour or for Gandharvas, or Vanaras or for even Devatas, or Indra who has done a hundred sacrifices, it is not possible to get relieved from bondage of the arrows of Indrajith of cruel deeds carried out by tricks."

"These arrows are serpents born of Kadra Devata. They have sharp fangs and are highly poisonous. By the tricks of Rakshasa, it has turned into arrows and reached you."

"You are lucky and also Lakshmana your brother, destroyer of foes in war. Rama your strength is truth, and you are righteous."

"Having heard the information about both of you bound by serpents, out of my friendship and affection and in obedience to you I hastened and reached here."

"Considering it as my duty to relieve you both from the frightful bondage of snakes I reached. Do not be inattentive and guileless."

"Rakshasas by nature use tricks in war. For noble people with good nature guilelessness is strength."

"Being so you should not trust Rakshasas. By this experience you know that Rakshasas are crooked."

Having said so, Suparna endowed with mighty strength embraced Rama most affectionately and took leave of him.

"My dear friend! I wish to take leave of you. Truly you are knower of what is right, and you are dear even to an enemy."

"Heroic Rama! No question about your curiosity about our friendship now. After winning the war you will recognize."

"Lanka will be left with youngsters and the aged with your arrows. The enemy Ravana killed, you will recover Sita."

Having spoken to Rama in that manner, Suparna endowed with wind speed in flight embraced Rama and went around him as a mark of reverence and soared into the sky.

Thereafter the Vanara troops, seeing the Raghavas freed from anguish, roared like a lion, and lashed their tails.

Then the Vanaras played drums and even mridangams, blew conches and started jumping and leaping as before.

The Vanaras who can fight with trees, uprooted several trees expressing their capacity distinctly and breaking them, and cracking their fingers. Making loud noise in hundreds and thousands stood there.

Making a lot of noise, the Vanaras reached the gates of Lanka frightening night rangers and desiring to wage war.

Thundering sounds resembling heavy clouds making terrific sounds arose, as if universal destruction was taking place at midnight.  ।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेपञ्चाशस्सर्गः ।।  This is the end of the fiftieth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.