Seeing Dhumraksha of terrible prowess returning, the vanaras made loud noises out of joy and desire to wage war.

Tumultuous war took place between Vanaras and Rakshasas, striking one another, monkeys with terrible trees and Rakshasas with tridents and clubs.

Fierce Rakshasas mowed down the Vanaras all over and even the Vanaras pulled down Rakshasas to the ground with trees.

Highly enraged Rakshasas on their part fixed the Vanaras with sharp dreadful arrows with itching feathers.

The Vanaras although strong were wielding maces, spikes, tridents, terrific iron bars and multitude of weapons of many kinds to crush the Rakshasas. They were endowed with prowess, knowledgeable of weapons and doing their duty without fear and with great enthusiasm.

Vanaras 's bodies split in their necks by the terrible tridents, took up trees and rocks to fight.

The monkeys endowed with terrific speed, proceeding from there roaring, proclaiming their names crushed the Rakshasa heroes.

Wonderful fight took place between Vanaras and Rakshasas who held trees and rocks of several kinds.

Vanaras who had conquered fear crushed Rakshasas into lumps of flesh indeed the Rakshasas threw out blood from their mouths.

Some tore by the sides of the body, some crushed by the trees, some powdered by the rocks, and some were torn into pieces with teeth.

Indeed, the night rangers were killed, their flags were broken. They were crushed, their swords were destroyed with chariots fallen.

By the Vanaras hurling from the mountains, the crushed elephants were like mountains and the horses with riders crushed covered the ground all over.

The Vanaras with their terrific valour jumping up wounded the Rakshasas in their face with their sharp nails.

Some others with pale faces and dishevelled hair lost senses due to rolling in blood dropped on the ground.

Other Rakshasas of terrific valour, extremely enraged, hit the monkeys with their palms which were hard as diamond to touch.

Endowed with speed, the Vanaras also fell on the Rakshasas at greater speed, knocking them down with fists, feet, teeth and even trees.

Dhumraksha, the bull among the Rakshasas seeing the army distressed and running away, being eager to fight began to cause havoc to the Vanaras.

Few Vanaras mutilated by barbed darts, some struck with mallets, blood oozing dropped down.

Some were pound by iron bars, some were torn up, some split and some pierced and cut ceased in life.

In the battlefield some Vanaras, attacked by Rakshasas, were floating on the ground in blood, dead.

Some with their hearts open and broken, beaten on side laid detached of their inner parts.

The monkeys and Rakshasa groups took part in a fierce fight with rocks and trees abounding loud noise.

It seemed like music in the form of twang of bow strings, neighing of horses like the sound of wooden cymbals, vocal music in the form of trumpeting of elephants, that battle seemed like symphony.

Dhumraksha with his bow in hand, showering arrows, laughing in battlefront dispersed the Vanaras in directions.

Beholding the perturbed army, Hanuman seized a huge rock and turned towards Dhumraksha.

Endowed with mighty valour equal to his father, an angry Hanuman hurled the rock at the chariot of Dhumraksha.

Beholding the rock descending upon him, Dhumraksha rushed instantly on the ground from the chariot and stood.

That rock fell on the chariot and got crushed along with its wheel and axle and with arrows.

Hanuman the son of WindGod in that way started destroying the chariot and the Rakshasa with tree trunks and stems.

Some Rakshasas hit by trees with their heads broken, shedding blood fell on the ground.

Hanuman the son of WindGod, after chasing the army of Rakshasas reaching the top of the mountain, jumped on Dhumraksha.

Lifting his mace on seeing Hanuman, heroic and brave Dhumraksha darted on Hanuman, roaring like a lion.

And then lifting his mace fixed with many nails, Dhumraksha enraged lighted on Hanuman.

That fierce mace fell on Hanuman's head. Hanuman who was equal to wind god without caring for the hit dropped the peak of the mountain on the centre of Dhumraksha's head.

By the falling of the peak of the mountain on Dhumraksha, all his limbs broken to pieces and crushed fell on the ground like a mountain.

Those Rakshasas who survived the onslaught, seeing Dhumraksha killed, reentered Lanka out of fear of being killed by Vanaras.

The son of wind god, the great soul, having killed the enemy in the battlefield and making the river of blood to flow, was exhausted by killing enemies. The monkeys started worshipping him in joy.  ।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेद्विपञ्चाशस्सर्गः ।।  This is the end of the fifty second sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.