On hearing about Vajradamshtra being killed by Vali's son, Ravana spoke to the chief of the army who stood with folded hands.

"Send for Akampana quickly, who is of terrific valour, difficult to encounter and skilled in all sastras."

Akampana is a tamer of foes, protector of people, in that way capable, always desirous of welfare, lover of war.

"Scorcher of enemies, this Akampana will win Sugriva of terrific might, Rama and Lakshmana, dreadful Vanaras, and put an end to enemies."

Then accepting Ravana's order, accordingly, taking hold of the army dispatched them.

Thereafter taking different weapons, Rakshasas of fearful eyes and terrific appearance rushed forward ordered by CommanderinChief of the army.

Mounted on a huge chariot, Akampana, decked in pure gold jewels, like cloud in form and complexion, whose loud voice resembled thunder, surrounded by Rakshasas went forward.

Akampana who, possibly could not be shaken in war by suras shone like the sun in that manner.

As Akampana was going forth excited to wage war, an expression of desperation developed suddenly in the horses drawing the chariots and an experience of depression in him.

Himself being a lover of war, became pale with his countenance changed, voice choked, and his eyes lost its lustre.

At a time on a good day of fine weather, it became cloudy, birds and beasts were making frightening cries all over.

He whose shoulders were developed like that of a lion, who equalled tiger in valour, went forth not minding the evil portents.

While that Akampana was going like that along with Rakshasas huge noise that arose was as if the ocean was agitated.

Huge troops of Vanaras holding trees and hillocks stood prepared for waging and by that the noise that arose expanded.

Vanaras and Rakshasas dedicated their lives for Rama and Ravana, respectively in that way were enraged and battle took place.

Intending to kill one another both Vanaras and Rakshasas who resembled hills, also of extraordinary might and heroic fighting.

A tremendous sound thundered in that war when they fought with exceeding impetuosity with one another and yelled at each other.

Terrific dust of red colour arose instantly in all the ten directions by the Vanaras, and Rakshasas and it enveloped all over.

The combatants could not see one another in the battlefield, and it seemed as though white silk piece was shaken by the wind by the appearance of the surrounding dust.

By the dust raised, the posts, flags, shields and not even horses, weapons and chariots were visible.

As they were rushing over one another, terrific noise was heard, and no form was discernible.

Then in that darkness and in anger Vanaras went attacking Vanaras and Rakshasas also attacked Rakshasas (not knowing).

Not knowing enemies and own people the Vanaras and Rakshasas terminating drenched the mud with their blood and covered the earth.

Then moistened with blood, the dust settled on the ground was seen covered with bodies and limbs.

Then Rakshasas and Vanaras fought one another vigorously with trees, javelins, maces, darts, rocks, and peaks.

The Vanaras of terrific deeds, like hills in form, resembling iron bars attacked many Rakshasas in the battle.

There, the highly furious Rakshasas also exterminated the Vanaras with their weapons and darts.

Highly enraged Akampana of fierce valour cheered all the Rakshasa troops.

Even the Vanaras mangled Rakshasas countering with weapons, huge rocks and trees and destroyed them.

In the meantime, in the midst Kumuda, Nala, Mainda, heroic vanaras became furious and went

Great heroes of the Vanara leaders, chiefs of army sportively waged a great battle and crushed Rakshasas repeatedly.  ।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेपञ्चपञ्चाशस्सर्गः ।।  This is the end of the fifty fifth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.