Observing the great action and accomplishment of the foremost Vanaras in the battle, Akampana exhibited violent anger.

Looking at the deeds of enemies, deluded with violent anger, Akampana spoke these words holding the bow and looking at the charioteer.

"O Charioteer, quickly drive the chariot to that place where many Rakshasas are destroyed in the battle."

"Those Vanaras are mighty and terribly angry. They are using trees and hillocks as weapons. Take me where chiefs are standing."

"I wish to see the end of Vanaras who boast of their warfare. The entire Rakshasa army is destroyed by them."

Then Akampana seated in the chariot drawn by fast moving horses, assailed the Vanaras with a network of arrows.

The Vanaras could not counter or stand nor fight in battle. What to say more? Shattered by Akampana's arrows, they all took to their heels.

Having observed that Vanaras are fallen under the sway of Akampana and under the sway of death, mighty Hanuman approached Akampana.

Seeing the great monkey, the Vanara troops got together and surrounded him.

Seeing Hanuman, the monkey leaders took their shelter under him, got established firmly and became strong.

On Akampana, who was well established like a mountain, mighty Hanuman showered torrents of arrows like Indra showered rain.

Mighty Hanuman unmindful of the volley of arrows pierced in his body thought in his mind only about the destruction of Akampana.

Hanuman, the highly energetic son of Maruthi laughing, sprung up causing the earth to shake and rushed to that Rakshasa.

As he roared, his brilliance was blazing, his form was burning and became formidable for others to be at him.

Vanara leader himself knowing that he is without any weapon, full of anger took up a mountain quickly.

He, the heroic Maruthi, with one hand alone taking a huge mountain whirled round making loud noises.

Then he went to Akampana and tormented him just as Indra did with his thunderbolt to Namuchi.

Seeing the peak of the mountain uplifted, Akampana also discharged halfmoon shaped great arrows from a distance.

Hanuman seeing the peak of the mountain broken into pieces by Rakshasa's arrows and fallen was deluded with anger.

He (Hanuman) filled with pride and anger quickly uprooted an Aswakarana tree as huge as a mountain and held it.

He (Hanuman) endowed with great splendour, seizing a huge trunk of Aswakarana tree with great delight, whirled it round on the ground laughing.

Highly enraged Hanuman was running at high speed that his feet were seen breaking the trees and cleaving the earth.

Hanuman struck the mahouts, elephants, similarly the chariots and riders of chariots as well as the terrific Rakshasas who fought standing on feet.

Hanuman, enraged like the spirit of death, took their life (Rakshasas) armed with trees and on seeing him the Rakshasas took to their heels.

The heroic Akampana saw Hanuman coming towards him very angry. Fearing Hanuman, the Rakshasas ran roaring in fear.

With fourteen pointed powerful arrows, Akampana tormented and split the body of Hanuman.

Valiant Hanuman, even though interrupted several times with rain of arrows, stood still like a mountain full of trees.

The gigantic Hanuman, exceedingly valiant and courageous one shone like a fully blossomed Ashoka tree, resembled smokeless fire.

Then Hanuman performed another supreme deed by uprooting a tree and striking on the head of Akampana, the chief of Rakshasas.

Reacting in anger the great Vanara chief struck the Rakshasa with a tree, by which the Rakshasa fell down dead.

Seeing Akampana lying dead on the ground, the Rakshasas were shaken like the trees in the earthquake and were distressed.

Abandoning weapons, all Rakshasas having been defeated, chased by the Vanaras, frightened, ran away into Lanka.

Perplexed, broken hearted, defeated, hair loosened the Rakshasas sweating all over their limbs, sighing heavily ran away very fast.

Again, and again looking back in fear, covertly, bewildered, crushing one another, they went into the Lanka city.

Those Rakshasas, endowed with prowess, on entering Lanka got together and paid respects to Hanuman.

Hanuman also who was richly endowed with goodness greatly honoured all the Vanaras accordingly.

In an atmosphere of triumph, the monkeys sportively shouted again saying that they are willing to give up their life also.

Great Vanara, Maruti shone like a triumphant hero and saviour in front of the army, just as Lord Vishnu, the Lord of Devatas shone after killing the foes (demons).

Thereafter Rama with the army of Devatas, Atibala and Lakshmana, in the same way Sugriva, the army chief, so also, Vibheeshana of exceeding might praised Hanuman.  ।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेषटपञ्चाशस्सर्गः ।।  This is the end of the fifty sixth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.