The king of Rakshasas hearing about the death of Akampana, was pale and a little angry and looked at his ministers.

Ravana, the king of Rakshasas, reflected for a while and deliberated with his ministers and proceeded in the forenoon to inspect all posts in Lanka.

Ravana saw Lanka guarded by the Rakshasa army, surrounded by many posts, with flags, posts, and pennants.

Ravana, the Lord of Rakshasas seeing the city besieged, spoke to Prahastha who was skilled in warfare for his welfare.

"I am not able to see anyone (other than you) knowledgeable in warfare to deliver the city oppressed suddenly and can liberate from war."

"Either myself or Kumbhakarna, or my CommanderinChief, or you, or Indrajith, or Nikumbha can undertake such a burden."

"Therefore, quickly get ready with the army and take charge for conquering the vanaras collected there."

As soon as you go there surely the unsettled Vanara army will run away hearing the uproar and loud noise of Rakshasas.

"Vanaras, who are fickle minded, undisciplined and volatile, will not endure the roar of lions of glowing Rakshasas."

"Prahastha! Knowing your strength, the helpless Vanaras will surely run away and along with Saumithri. Rama will fall into your power."

"If uncertain death comes it is good, not when it comes by not encountering. Think what is acceptable to you and what is not acceptable to you and that is acceptable to me."

Prahastha, the CommanderinChief having heard Ravana, replied to the king of Rakshasas just as the preceptor of Rakshasas spoke to Bali.

"O king! This was deliberated with capable ministers earlier, is it not It was reviewed with one another, and controversy arose."

"If Sita is given away it is beneficial and if not given war is foreseen is known to us."

"You have always given me gifts, many honours and praises earlier and worshipped me. When time comes why will I not do"

"I do not need to protect my life, sons, wives and wealth also. I am willing to give up my life also in war for you. You will see."

Prahastha, having submitted to his king Ravana in that way, the CommanderinChief of the army commanded the army that stood before him.

"Get the great Rakshasa army together with me to the battlefield speedily. By my arrows all the carnivorous birds will be killed and satisfied with the flesh (of Vanaras) today", said Prahastha.

As soon as the commander in chief ordered in that way, the Rakshasa troops mobilized in the abode of Rakshasas.

In a short while the whole of Lanka was filled with elephant size Rakshasa warriors gathered with different kinds of weapons.

A fragrant breeze blew past there with Rakshasas propitiating fire god, with offerings and by the worshipping of brahmins the air was pleasant filled with the fragrance of ghee and flowers.

Then the Rakshasas rejoiced, wishing victory, consecrated military material with chanting and wore flower garland s.

Wearing bows and shields, looking at and greeting the king Ravana, they swiftly surrounded Prahastha.

Taking leave of the king and causing terrific sound of blowing of drums, Prahastha, ascended, laughing on to a splendorous chariot, equipped to fight, driven by horses endowed with good speed and capable charioteer, sounding like a thundering cloud, shining like the sun and moon, with a sign of serpent on flag, provided with a wooden fence for defence, which was difficult to collide, covered with gold net.

Then, by the order of Ravana, Prahastha set out immediately and departed from Lanka taking a se at in the chariot, surrounded by the great army.

As the CommanderinChief was going there arose sounds of kettle drums, blasts of fanfares, and noise of blasts of conchs filling the earth was heard.

Rakshasas of fierce appearance, of huge body size, making dreadful sounds went marching ahead of Prahastha.

Naranthaka, Kumbhahanu, Mahanada, Samunnatha, the adjutants of Prahastha went with him.

He, emerged from the eastern gate, surrounded by a huge, formidable army formed into a battlearray, which resembled a herd of elephants.

Prahastha emerged in rage surrounded by his forces which was like an ocean that resembled Kala (time spirit), Anthaka (death) and Yama (God of death).

By the sounds of roaring that emerged at the departure of the Rakshasas all beings of Lanka shrieked in unnatural ways.

The birds living on flesh and blood reached the sky and circled anticlockwise around the chariot.

A meteor fell from the sky, the wind blew violently. Jackals howled vomiting tongues of fire.

The planets clashing with one another did not shine. The clouds were violent like donkeys and rained blood on top of the chariot and the marching Rakshasas drenched.

Seeing a vulture sitting on the banner (of Prahastha) facing south scratching both sides, Prahastha became pale as if the entire prosperity had been snatched away.

A charioteer and knower of controlling the horses, the whip slipped many times from his hand.

The splendour of Prahastha which is difficult to destroy, disappeared at that moment and the horses stumbled on even ground.

Seeing Prahastha, who is well known for his valour coming towards, for war with various weapons, the monkey army stood facing.

And when the monkeys took hold of heavy rocks and trees for fighting exceedingly tumultuous clamor arose.

The yelling noise of Rakshasas and roaring noise of Vanaras of both armies, who were powerful and seized with speed, who sought the destruction of one another, challenging noises of Rakshasas and Vanaras, highly rejoiced, was heard.

Thereafter, perverted Prahastha entered into that army of monkey king grown immensely, to conquer the army, just as moth enters into flame, being at the point of death.  ।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेसप्तपञ्चाशस्सर्गः ।।  This is the end of the fifty seventh sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.