Nila settled the army successfully by making them reside on the northern shore of the sea, as per tradition.

Dwivida and Mainda, the best of the vanaras, went about in all directions for safeguarding the army.

After the army had settled down on the shores of the lord of rivers (sea), Rama spoke to Lakshmana who stood beside him.

As time passes, grief passes away. However my sorrow is progressing day by day being unable to see my beloved.

There is no grief in me that my beloved is at a distance, nor that she is taken away. Indeed her age is advancing. On this account I am feeling for her.

O Wind Touch that place where my beloved is and touch me as it will give me the same feeling as my beloved's touch. Through the moon I will get her eye contact too.

While being carried away that beloved of mine would have cried aloud saying 'oh my lord'. This thought is burning my body as though I have consumed poison in my stomach.

The pain of separation from her is working as fuel and the thought about hers is engulfing me as extensive flame and burning my body day and night.

O Saumitri Plunging into water alone I will lie down. Probably then the god of love will not be able to consume me while sleeping.

Me and Sita are seeking refuge on the same land indeed. Because of that only survival is possible for me, who is desiring for her very much.

I am living only because of hearing about her survival, just as a paddy field without water gets wet by the proximity of a neighboring paddy field with water.

When will I be able to win the enemies and see that Sita of charming limbs, with large and beautiful eyes like lotus petals, who is like an abundance of fortune?

I do not know when I will lift her lotuslike face slightly and drink her beautiful lips like an afflicted man drinks sweet juice.

I am eager to cling to her Palmyra fruits like plumpy breasts. Indeed when will I enjoy her embrace?

That darkeyed lady (Sita), even though she has me (husband), is in the midst of rakshasas. Surely she is sad and emaciated being away from her husband, without a protector.

My beloved is king Janaka's daughter and daughterinlaw of Dasaratha. Yet she is sleeping amid Rakshasas. How is it?

When will she come out pushing the Rakshasas like the crescent moon comes out pushing the dark clouds in autumn?

Sita who is by nature slim would surely be slender due to abstaining from eating, unfavorable time and location.

Indeed by shooting arrows into the chest of rakshasa king, when will I get back Sita and cast off grief from my mind.

When will Sita, the chaste woman, who is like the daughter of Gods, cling to my neck, and indeed shed tears of joy?

When will I get rid of this terrible grief of separation from Mythili for good, just like discarding a soiled garment?

While sagacious Rama was wailing in that way the day came to an end with the sun descending to the west.

Remembering the lotus petal eyed Sita, Rama who was distracted with grief, comforted by Lakshmana offered evening prayers.  ।।इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्दकाण्डेपञ्चमस्सर्गः।।  This is the end of the fifth Sarga of Yuddhakanda of the first epic, the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.