Hearing the words of mighty Kumbhakarna, of massive body and round arms Mahodara said.

"Kumbhakarna! Although you are born of noble race, you are insolent, seeing your low intellect in all aspects you have no knowledge of what should be done or not to be done."

"Ravana, a bull among Rakshasas is conversant with rules of time and place and knows his own enemies, his progress and decline also."

" A strong person of unsophisticated intellect, who is progressive, a knower of everything will do such a task which is not possible to do?"

"The virtues, worldly gain and sensuous pleasures give results separately as you said. They are incompatible with what you said and that it is its nature you said. what is the proof?"

" Actions alone are the means of happiness. Being so how can sinful actions accrue good results?"

" All virtues and worldly pleasures and even otherwise give only benefit. But if done with disinterest and unrighteousness it can give a result which is other than prosperity."

" All beings reap the fruit of their actions in this world as well as in other worlds. He, who remains to be pleasure seeking, devoted to actions will receive blessings and attain pleasures in this life only (not here after)."

" At that time the king intended in his heart (to abduct Sita), and we approved his action, and it was done. What is wrong in doing such a courageous action against an enemy?"

"You have set out alone (for war) and the reason adduced by you is ill conceived and improper. I shall tell you."

"How is it possible for you single handed to win Raghava of exceeding might, who killed many Rakshasas in the past at Janasthana?"

"Look! Those highly energetic Rakshasas, who were won by Rama at Janasthana are scared of him even now."

"Do you desire to awaken Rama, who is like an enraged lion knowingly, who is like a sleeping snake?"

"Who can dare to approach Rama, who is difficult to encounter, unbearable and burning in anger like the spirit of death."

"Face to face with the enemy this total army will be in danger. You're going alone is certainly not desirable."

"How can a weak person desire to go to the enemy who is rich in resources, determined to sacrifice his life several times and submit himself?"

"O Best of Rakshasas! How would you enter into combat with one who is great among all human beings and while even Indra and Sun God are not equal to him in war?"

Mahodara having spoken to agitated Kumbhakarna in the midst of Rakshasas in this way, submitted to Ravana, who makes people cry.

"Having got Vaidehi, why are you talking like that? Sita will submit to you if you desire."

"O King of Rakshasas! A means of bringing her round is known to me. Listen, think over with your intellect."

"You pronounce that I, Dwijihva, Samhradri, Kumbhakarna and Vitardana, five of us will go forth to kill Rama."

"Thereafter, proceeding forth we shall try to win your enemy. If we win, there will be no purpose for you to do any action."

"If our enemy survives in combat, we too will survive and review as we planned and see."

"Bathed in blood, wounded by the arrows marked with Rama's name, bodies torn cruelly we will come here from war."

"We too will hold your feet saying 'Rama and Lakshmana have been devoured by us'. Then you will grant our desires."

"Thereafter mounted on elephant backs all over the city will make a rakshasa pronounce that Rama accompanied by his brother are killed."

"O tamer of enemies! In the name of expression of happiness, thereafter gift items of enjoyment to the attendants, and companions and granting wealth as per their desire.

"Thereafter give your warriors, garlands, cosmetics and many drinks and drink yourself happily."

Thereafter, when the scandal that Rama and Lakshmana with all his friends have been devoured is widely spread everywhere, approaching Sita privately, restoring confidence and consoling her, tempt her with offering wealth, grain and gems and conciliate.

"O King! By conjuring her like this, helpless Sita overtaken by fear and sorrow having lost her husband will submit to you in spite of no desire to you."

"Her charming husband ceased to live and thinking of no alternate, being a fickle woman, will accept your dependence."

"That Sita having grown up in much comfort, deserved felicity. Tormented with grief, desperate, depending on you alone for happiness, will submit to you completely."

"To me this is the best course. As soon as you see Rama, do not be eager for war. It is meaningless. Great gain will accrue to you from here."

"O Lord of the people! If a king conquers his enemy without any loss of army, without facing any dangerand without war, such a mighty ruler of the earth will indeed earn fame and merit and attain prosperity."  ।।इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेचतुष्षष्टितमस्सर्गः।।  This is the end of the sixty fourth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.