Mighty Kumbhakarna, a gigantic one, resembling a mountain peak, having swiftly crossed over the boundary of the city roared.

Kumbhakarna roared making loud noises as if proclaiming victory, like the breaking of mountains and reverberating of ocean.

Observing that rakshasa with frightening eyes, who could not be killed by Indra or Yama or even by Varuna coming towards them the vanaras ran in fear.

Seeing the Vanaras running in fear, Angada spoke to Nala, Nila, Gavaksha, Mahabala and Kumuda.

"Forgetting yourself, that you are warriors, not knowing by nature, being Vanaras where are you going?"

"O good Vanaras! You are modest. Return. Why are you protecting your life? This Rakshasa is not capable of facing war. He can create only fear."

"O Vanaras! We will dispel this huge rakshasa, a nightmare with our power. Come back."

Overcoming fear, the Vanaras getting together from here and there holding trees by hand, proceeded to the battlefield.

Those forest rangers who were extremely enraged turned back to hit, determined like the elephants in rut went to vanquish Kumbhakarna.

Though Kumbhakarna was hit with lofty mountain peaks and trees with blossoms at crests, he was not shaken.

Fallen on his limbs many rocks got broken, even the treetops with blossoms were broken and fell on the ground.

Enraged Kumbhakarna began to destroy Vanaras endowed with extraordinary vigour, just as great forest fire burns the forest.

Many bulls among the Vanaras lay on the ground like trees with red flowers on top tossed and fallen on the ground.

The Vanaras leapt without looking back. Indeed, some dropped into the ocean, and some flew into space.

Struck by Rakshasa, the Vanaras ran in the same path crossing the ocean (by which they came).

Out of fear the vanaras rushed to plains with pale countenance, some climbed up mountains and bears climbed up trees.

Some drowned in the ocean, some entered into the caves, some others not knowing what to do sat down and others fell on the ground and some slept as if dead.

Seeing the monkeys routed, Angada spoke, 'Stay, return back. We will fight'

"I do not see any refuge for you even if you go round the globe. All of you return back. Why do you preserve life?"

"Monkeys! Your valour can't be challenged. If you run away for life abandoning weapons even your wives will ridicule you. That is more than death."

"You are born in noble families, and are widely spread. As such why are you running away like ordinary monkeys as if terrified giving up your valour. It is not worthy of you."

"Earlier in the assembly of people you made vigorous statements and acclaimed yourselves highly with selfpraise. Where has it gone?"

"He who is defeated lives, but people will say he is timid. Resorting to the path of good people and serving them gives up fear."

"If we are killed in war, fallen dead on the ground and our life span is reduced, we will attain the realm of Brahma which is difficult to attain."

"By killing the enemy, we will attain fame. Or else we will attain the world of Brahma, liberated."

"Just as flies reaching the blazing fire can't escape, so also Kumbhakarna can't escape with life after facing Kakuthsa."

"Even though we are distinguished, if we preserve our life by running away for life, destroyed by one, our glory will come to an end."

While the heroic Angada, adorned with gold armlets, was speaking in that manner to the fleeing vanara heroes, condemned by the hero the vanaras replied as follows.

"Kumbhakarna, the Rakshasa has done havoc to us. This is not the moment to stay. Our life is dear to us."

All the Vanara troops having replied that way, seeing Kumbhakarna of frightful eyes coming towards them, scattered in all directions.

Though the heroic monkeys were running away, Angada by his good words and examples turned them to return from wherever they were.

All the Vanara troops having heard Angada, son of Vali happily restored awaiting his command.

Rshaba, Sarabha, Mainda and Nila, Kumuda, Susena, Rambha, and Tara headed by Dwiviida, Panasa and Hanuman marched ahead swiftly to the battlefield.  ।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेषष्टितमस्सर्गः ।।  This is the end of the sixty sixth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic, the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.