Hearing the lamentations of the evilminded Ravana, Trisira spoke to him.

"There is no doubt that Kumbhakarna, who is your middle father and uncle, was also endowed with great prowess. He has been killed. O King! Good men like you do not wail."

"O King! You are a conqueror of the three worlds. Why do you wail like a common man?"

"You are bestowed by Brahma with a javelin, a shield and an arrow and a chariot yoked by a thousand donkeys making rumbling sounds like a cloud."

"Devas and Danavas have been won over by you, deprived of weapons also. Now endowed with all weapons you will be able to win Raghava."

"O King! Stay on. I will move forth to the battlefield and uproot your enemy like Garuda uprooted serpents."

"Just as Lord of Devas by Sambara, and Vishnu by Naraka, in the same way Rama will also be destroyed struck by me."

Ravana, the king of Rakshasas, hearing Trisira's words thought that impelled by destiny that he was reborn.

Hearing Trisira's words both Devanthaka and Naranthaka and glorious Atikaya became enthusiastic for combat.

Then Ravana's sons, the heroes, and bulls among ogres, equal to Indra in valour, roared saying, "I will start", "I will lead."

All (sons of Ravana) are capable of coursing through the sky, experts in conjuring tricks, capable of crushing the pride of Devatas and all, are fierce in fighting.

All sons of Ravana possessed stupendous strength, all were very famous, and never got defeated in war be it Gandharvas, Kinnaras or even gods will get vanquished by them.

All were experts in the use of weapons, all were heroes and skilled in warfare, knowledgeable in scriptures, so also all were blessed with boons.

Surrounded by his sons, who matched Sun in brilliance and capable of crushing the pride of foes, great in destroying immortals, Ravana shone like Lord gods.

Ravana embraced his sons, decked them with ornaments and jewels and enriched them and offered benediction and sent to encounter.

Ravana sent his two brothers Yuddhonmatta and Matta for the protection of his sons for defence in combat.

Those heroes greeting gigantic Ravana, went around him clockwise (as per tradition) and departed.

The six leaders endowed with great strength, anointing themselves with fragrance, which can ward off injury went to fight.

Trisira, also Atikaya, Devanthaka, Naranthaka, Mahodara and Mahaparsva impelled by destiny went.

Thereafter Mahodara mounted on an elephant born of Airavata (Indra 's elephant) family, by name Sudarsana went.

Ready with all kinds of weapons, quivers as well mounted on elephants shone like the setting Sun in the west.

Ravana's brother, Trisira went mounted on a chariot yoked to the best of horses with all kinds of weapons.

Wielding a bow and sitting like a leader in the chariot Trisira shone as if attended by lightning, meteors, light, and rainbows.

Trisira seated in the best of chariots, with his three heads adorned with crowns shone like the golden mountain, Himalayas with its three peaks.

Then Atikaya the very bright son of Rakshasa king, foremost of all archers mounted on the best of chariots.

The chariot (of Atikaya) had excellent wheels, well fitted with strong axles, stout poles, equipped with quivers and bows, with best of spears, bars, and swords.

His wonderful coronet encrusted with gold was shining, sparkling, and looked splendid like the Meru Mountain.

The tiger among ogres (Atikaya) surrounded by the great army of ogres, the prince was shining in the chariot like Indra, the king of gods and wielder of thunderbolt.

Naranthaka, mounted on Uchaisrava, the white horse, decked in gold, was swift as thought in speed.

Naranthaka seizing a barbed missile like a burning spear, looked like son of Lord Siva wielding javelin in hand.

Devanthaka, holding a bar encrusted with diamonds in both hands, seemed like Vishnu in disguise with a mountain (to churn the milky ocean).

Mahaparsva holding an ace in hand in the war shone like Kubera.

Those great souls followed by elephants, horses, Rakshasas with superb weapons sounding like the rumbling of rainy clouds went like gods of Amaravati.

The great princes were wearing crowns resplendent like the Sun and glowing like planets in the sky.

The princes, grasping the white weapons shone like flocks of white cranes in the dark autumnal clouds in the sky.

Those heroes determined to defeat the enemy even if it meant death and went thinking for the combat.

The great Rakshasas who were fierce in combat went roaring shouting loudly and discharging arrows.

By the sound of their clapping of arms and their lion roar it was as though the sky was breaking and the earth was shaking.

Departing from there the Rakshasa army saw Vanara army ready with many rocks.

The huge monkeys also saw groups of elephants, horses and chariots and heard hundreds of bells of the chariots and Rakshasas all over like groups of dark clouds with huge weapons glowing like fire and Sun surrounded by Rakshasa army.

Seeing the Rakshasa army approaching, the monkeys found an opportunity to attack them and collected huge mountains, deadly strong trees in great joy unable to tolerate roared in return.

There upon the Vanara leaders, endowed with extraordinary prowess, beholding the joy of Rakshasa troops, unable to bear roared dreadfully.

Those monkey leaders entering dreadful Rakshasa army uplifted rocks and mountains with trees and shone.

Some monkeys springing into the sky, while some staying on earth, with trees, rocks as weapons, enraged, ranged the Rakshasa army.

Vanara leaders seizing huge branches of trees fought a frightening war with Rakshasas.

The Vanaras of dreadful valour and unparalleled might waged with trees, rock and mountain when obstructed by the Rakshasas।।

The Rakshasas and Vanaras enthusiastic in the battlefield roared like lion. The Vanaras pounded the Rakshasas with rocks.

In the combat, the enraged Vanaras killed Rakshasas decked with shields and ornaments. Some killed the ones mounted on chariots, elephants, and horses.

The Rakshasa leaders, hit by the blows of Vanaras, fell down on the mountain peaks, trembling with their eyes protruded by the blows of fists.

The Rakshasas also pierced with arrows the foremost of the monkeys and struck with tridents swords and lances.

Their limbs stained with the blood of foes, both Vanaras and Rakshasas eager to conquer one another started striking one another.

Then in a short while the battlefield was covered with blood and rocks and swords used by the monkeys and Rakshasas.

There, the battlefield was filled with mountain like forms of Rakshasas drunk with the pride of warfare, lying scattered all over.

Vanaras, were lifting and dropping the scattered Rakshasas, breaking the tridents and a wonderful war went on using their limbs.

The bull among Rakshasas struck at Vanaras with other Vanaras and the monkeys struck Rakshasas with other Rakshasas.

The monkeys struck at the Rakshasas taking the weapons left over and tearing the weapons of the Rakshasas and the Vanaras also struck the Rakshasas.

In the battlefield both Vanaras and Rakshasas struck at one another with their head, rocks and swords and emitted lion roar.

The Rakshasas killed by Vanaras, their shields and weapons broken, blood flowed from their limbs just as sap exudes from broken trees.

In the battlefield a chariot with another chariot, an elephant with another elephant, a horse with another horse struck one another.

Rakshasas shattered the Vanara leaders with horseshoe shaped, halfmoon shaped, spear shaped sharp arrows, as well as trees and rocks.

The battlefield, covered with broken trees and mountains, fallen vanaras and rakshasas, seemed difficult to tread on ground.

Those Vanaras leaving behind fear, reaching the war field, rejoicing with pride, not at all depressed, carried out war with Rakshasas.

As the conflict progressed and tumultuous fighting was on, Vanaras were feeling exultant and seeing Rakshasas struck down the ascetics and Devatas made loud noises in joy.

Then Naranthaka, mounted on horseback went at wind speed taking hold of javelin and entered Vanara army just as fish entered the ocean.

Great hero (Naranthaka) single handed persistently destroyed seven hundred Vanaras with his glowing spear. In that way the enemy of Indra shattered Vanara army and monkey leaders.

Vidhyadhara, the great sage, witnessed Naranthaka moving seated on the horseback firmly.

On the way he saw flesh and blood fallen like a heap of a mountain covered fully with Vanaras.

Naranthaka went past the Vanara leaders all over even before they attempted, he destroyed them.

Uplifting his lance in the battle, Naranthaka consumed the Vanara troops as fire would burn up forests even before the Vanaras uprooted trees and rocks. many Vanaras fell like mountains hit by a thunderbolt.

Mighty Naranthaka, the destroyer of humans, ranged over all sides in all directions in the battlefield, like the wind in the rainy season, taking a burning spear and crushing everything.

The gallant monkeys got terrified and could not flee, nor stand, nor move. The audacious Naranthaka marching ahead pierced the Vanaras either marching or jumping or stationary.

With lance that looked like death and the spear glowing like the Sun, Naranthaka routed the Vanaras, who fell down.

Unable to bear the very severe impact of the strike of the spear which was like the strike of thunderbolt the Vanaras cried making loud noise.

The forms of the monkey heroes fallen down unconscious shone like mountain peaks struck by the thunderbolt and fallen.

The Vanaras who were struck by Kumbhakarna and fallen unconscious, came and stood before Sugriva.

Sugriva looked around all over the monkey troops running here and there out of fear of Naranthaka.

(Sugriva) saw the Vanaras troops running and Naranthaka seated on horseback advancing with a spear.

Sugriva, the Lord of Vanaras seeing (Naranthaka advancing) spoke to his son Angada who resembled Indra in valour.

"Oh! March ahead and immediately release the life of the Rakshasa seated on horseback terrifying the Vanara army."

On hearing the king's words, Angada went just as the sun rays comes out of a cluster of clouds.

Angada, the best of the Vanaras, adorned with arm lets resembled masses of rocks and shone like a mountain with metal streaks.

Brilliant Angada, unarmed only with nails and teeth (to fight) advanced towards Naranthaka and spoke these words.

"Stop! What can you do with these common monkeys? Throw your spear at me, which equals thunderbolt."

Hearing Angada's words Naranthaka flew into a rage. Biting his lips with teeth, hissing like a serpent Naranthaka stood before Angada. He hurled his spear glowing like fire on Angada's chest violently. It struck Angada and shattered, went round, and fell.

Then Vali's son beholding the broken and shattered spear fallen like the coils of serpent, raised his palm and struck at the head of Naranthaka's horse.

His horse, which closely resembled a mountain, fell on the ground, its head broken, cheeks drawn in, eyeballs broken, tongue got ejected by the stroke of the palm of Angada.

Observing the horse fallen, Naranthaka, endowed with great power, overcome by anger raised his fist and struck at the head of Vali's son.

Angada's head smashed by the blow of the fist of Naranthaka, hot blood flowed rapidly for a while. Recovering from delusion, gaining consciousness he wondered at the strength of Naranthaka.

Angada clenching his fist, whose vehemence was equal to vehemence of death coming down from the top of the mountain peak, brought down Naranthaka.

Naranthaka's chest having been split by a blow on his chest, vomiting flaming blood from his throat was as if shattered by the stroke of lightning fell down like a mountain.

Naranthaka, the foremost of the heroes, having been killed in combat, the Devatas and gods of the three worlds experienced great joy.

Rama was wonderstruck and very happy at Angada's valour. He said that Angada has done the most difficult task. Angada was equally happy and ready for another battle.  ।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेएकोनसप्ततितमस्सर्गः ।।  This is the end of the sixty ninth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.