The two brothers (Rama and Lakshmana) become unconscious in the forefront of the battle the monkey leaders lose senses. Sugriva, Neela, Angada and Jambavantha did not know What to do.

Thereafter, foremost among the wise, Vibheeshana observing the despondency of the monkey leaders spoke to them reassuring in incomparable words.

"O Noble men! Do not fear. Rama and Lakshmana are afflicted by Indrajith's volley of arrows and have lost senses. They are despondent to honour the statement of the creator not otherwise."

To him (Indrajith), the creator has conferred this weapon of Brahma endowed with terrific speed. To respect the missile both the princes have fallen. Why do you grieve?

Thereafter, hearing Vibheeshana's words, wise Hanuman spoke this with respect to the missile of Brahma.

"Whoever is strong among Vanaras, have been struck and are alive breathing among the Vanaras. Let us restore their confidence."

The two heroes, Hanuman and Vibheeshana, and the foremost of Rakshasas with torch in hand searched for the left over Vanaras in the battlefield.

Two of them saw the ground covered with Vanaras of mountainlike forms, who had fallen with tails cut off, some with broken thighs, broken legs and fingers, necks severed, letting off blood, discharging urine and glowing weapons lying on the ground.

Vibheeshana and Hanuman saw in the battlefield Sugriva, Angada, Neela, Sarabha, Gandhamadana, Gavaksha, Sushena, Vegadarsi, Ahuka, Mainda, Nala, Jyothimukha, Dwivida and Panasa struck down.

By the creator's missile Indrajith struck down sixtyseven crores of strong Vanaras between the fifth and last part of the day.

Vibheeshana and Hanuman seeing the ocean of Vanara army and the glowing arrows on them, looked for Jambavantha.

Paulastya (Vibheeshana of Paulastya clan), seeing the son of Prajapathi (Jambavan), who by nature was wise and aged, afflicted by hundreds of arrows, like a cooling fire sacrifice, went close by and spoke these words.

"O Noble Jambavan! Indeed, your life has not been afflicted with these sharp arrows." Hearing this, Jambavan uttered these words with difficulty."

"Great hero, Vibheeshana! I recognise you by your voice. Pierced with sharp arrows I am not able to see you."

Vibheeshana (Rakshasa)! Indeed, Hanuman, the foremost of Vanaras, by whose birth, Anjana and Supraja are blessed as parents, are they alive?

After hearing Jambavantha, Vibheeshana said "Noble son, why are you enquiring about Hanuman?"

"Noble one! You are showing affection to Hanuman but not to King Sugriva, or Angada or even Raghava?"

On hearing Vibheeshana, the tiger among Rakshasas, Jambavan replied, "Listen why I enquired about Maruthi."

If this hero Hanuman is alive, even if the army is destroyed and if we are alive, it is like dead only.

"Dear! If Hanuman who is equal to wind god, resembles Vyshvanara (God of fire) is breathing, then we can hope to live (for life)."

Thereafter, Hanuman the son of the wind god coming close to the aged Jambavan clasped his feet in accordance with tradition and greeted him.

Then again, Jambavan whose senses were affected, on hearing the statement of Hanuman, the foremost of Vanaras, felt as though he was born again.

Then brilliant Jambavan spoke to Hanuman, the tiger among Vanaras, on reaching him. "You ought to protect the Vanaras."

"You are fully endowed with prowess and great friend of monkeys in that way. It is time for you to show your talent. Indeed, I do not see anyone else."

For the Bears and Vanaras, create excessive happiness. For Rama and Lakshmana who are unconscious, make them comfortable.

"Hanuman, you ought to go very far over the sea to the Himalayas, the highest mountain."

"O Destroyer of enemies! there on top you will see the foremost of the mountain Rshaba and on the peak of Kailasa."

"Heroic Hanuman! In the middle of those two mountains, you will see a highly splendid mountain covered with all kinds of medicinal herbs."

"O Tiger among monkeys! You will see on the summit four medicinal herbs growing there illuminating the ten directions."

"Mrtasanjivani, Visalyakarani, Suvarnakarani, Sandhani, all these herbs are grown there."

"Hanuman, taking the four herbs you, the son of wind god ought to return immediately with the speed of wind, to unite the life of the monkeys and reassure."

"Hearing the instruction of Jambavantha, the son of the wind god, infused with wind speed as the ocean, heaves with the force of wind increasing his strength fully."

Standing on the summit of the foremost of the mountains, hero Hanuman pressing his feet seemed like a second mountain

Trodden by the feet of Hanuman that mountain pressed forcibly by himself could not bear his strength.

Oppressed by the speed of Hanuman, the mountain fell to the ground and by the impetuosity of his speed the mountain got shattered.

As the foremost of the mountain got oppressed it crushed the trees and rocks on it and Vanaras were unable to stand on it.

Then the mighty gates of Lanka shaking, homes shattered, stricken with fear that night it seemed Lanka was dancing.

Son of the wind god, who was like a mountain supported by earth, pressing hard caused the earth with its ocean to shake.

From that mountain the monkey sprang to Malaya Mountain which was like Meru and Mandara mountains. It was set with various springs, covered with various trees and creepers, abounded with lotuses, frequented by Devas, Gandharvas. It was sixty yojanas high and visited by Vidhyadharas, celestial nymphs, and sages, filled with various species of deer and numerous caves. Yakshas, Gandharvas, and Kinnaras were living there. There the son of the wind god grew in size like a cloud.

Pressing the mountain hard by his feet, opening his largemouth wide, he roared like Rakshasas to make Rakshasas fearful.

All the Rakshasas in Lanka hearing the loud roar of Hanuman were afraid and could not stir from there.

Maruti, scorcher of enemies, endowed with terrific valour offered prayers to Sri Rama and made up his mind to embark on the stupendous task for Raghava.

Raising his tail which resembled a serpent, bending his back, and ears, opening his mouth wide expounded Hanuman sprang up at terrific speed.

By the speed of his arms and thighs clusters of branches of trees, mountains, rocks, and common monkeys were attracted, and with reduction of speed along the way the rocks fell.

Stretching his arms which resembled coils of serpents, whose valour equalled Garuda, enemy of serpents, as if attracting all the directions went to the summit of the foremost mountain which equalled Meru mountain.

Observing the ocean whose waves were made to revolve round (by his speed), exceedingly, whose creatures were made to whirl round violently (by the wind force generated by his speed), he went forth like the wheel loosened from Vishnu's hand.

Watching the mountains, trees, birds, rivers, tanks, the best of cities, all of them and prosperous people, he went at his father's speed.

Hanuman who was equal to his father in prowess, went unwearied, hurriedly in the path of the Sun.

Maruthi, the tiger among monkeys went like the wind possessing great speed filling sound in all directions.

Going at wind speed, the great monkey Maruthi, remembering Jambavantha's words, reached and sighted the Himalayas.

He reached the foremost of mountains, which was adorned with different kinds of springs, many caves and cascades and graced with trees. The peaks were like masses of white autumn clouds graced with splendour and beautiful to look at.

Reaching there he saw the tall and terrifying peaks of the Lord of mountains frequented by Devatas and sages, meritorious hermitages.

He saw the seat of Brahma, the abode of Rajathanabha, the abode of Indra, the location from which Rudra discharged an arrow (at Tripura), the abode of Lord Hayagriva, and glowing abode of the deity presiding over Brahmastra and Vyvasvatah's attendants.

He saw Vajralayam (where Brahma gave Indra the thunderbolt), the abode of Kubera shining like the Sun, the spot where the Sun was bound, Brahma's abode and the abode of the bow of Lord Siva, and the earth navel.

He saw Kailas, the rocks of Himalayas, that way on the Rshaba the foremost Lord Siva, the golden mountain, and the great mountain on which grew, glowing medicinal herbs.

Observing the herbs blazing like fire, he was astonished at the herbs on the mountain and went round thinking of the names of herbs (asked by Jambavan).

The great monkey, son of the wind god, having traversed a thousand yojanas began to range the wonderful herbs and went about searching.

Perceiving a seeker coming for them, the herbs all over the wonderful mountain disappeared.

The great soul Hanuman was not able to see, those herbs, became angry and his eyes were burning like fire in anger. He jumped up and roared and said to the lordly mountain.

"O King of mountains! You are not showing compassion to Raghava. Is it your determination to be like this? Overcome by my shoulder strength I shall crush you now. You may see."

Seizing hold of the peaks vehemently, its trees, elephants, gold mines withthousands of minerals he crushed the projections and set fire and burnt and uprooted swiftly.

Striking terror among Devatas and demons and leaders inhabiting the world, uprooting the mountain he hurried at Garuda's speed into the sky praised by aerial creatures.

Resembling the Sun closely, radiant like the Sun he was taking the top of the mountain, betaking himself in the vicinity of the Sun he was like another Sun.

He, the son of the wind god sitting upon the crag, was delightful like Vishnu with a flaming wheel shining.

Observing him high the Vanaras became joyful, and he also saw them. Hearing their loud noise becoming aware of the Rakshasas of Lanka also roared in terrible fear.

The great Hanuman along with the mountain descended in the midst of the Vanara army, and greeted the army head bent down and embraced Vibheeshana standing there.

The two sons of the ruler of men inhaling the fragrance of the herbs became free from wounds. Other Vanara heroes also got restored.

All those Vanara warriors killed were restored with life instantly by the fragrance. Those who were asleep also got up when they became fully awake.

From the beginning of the war in Lanka till the end without exception, all the Rakshasas were killed in war by the Vanara leaders then and there were thrown into the ocean by Ravana's instruction, not to have means of proof.

The son of the wind god sprung from there hurriedly took the mountain of herbs to Himalayas and returned and joined Rama.  ।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेचतुस्सप्ततितमस्सर्गः ।।  This is the end of the seventy fourth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.