While the fierce fight brought destruction of heroes in the ongoing combat, Angada eager to fight, assailed gallant Kampana.

Kampana struck Angada challenging himin anticipation. He swiftly hurled a mace in anger and hurt him grievously and Angada reeled.

Rejuvenated Angada, after gaining consciousness acquired a mountain peak and shattered Kampana with a blow. wounded Kampana fell down.

Then seeing Kampana killed, Sonitaksha, a fearless hero, quickly reached Angada by chariot.

He (Sonitaksha) swiftly pierced with pointed shafts resembling fire raging at the time of dissolution and struck Angada with arrows known by names, Ksura, Ksurapra, Naracha, Vatsadanta, Silimukha, Karni, Salya, vipada and many sharp arrows.

Courageous son of Vali, the mighty Angada encountered with vigour and crumbled the formidable bow (of Sonitaksha), his chariot and arrows.

Thereupon enraged Sonitaksha, quickly sprang up to the sky at high speed with sword and shield.

Mighty Angada springing up at a higher speed grasped his (Sonitaksha) hand and irritated him with a sword making loud noise.

Then Angada pierced his sword on the fl at surface of his shoulder diagonally and cut him with his sword.

Vali's son, seizing that great sword again and again, roaring to finally terminate the remaining Rakshasas, went forward.

Sonitha adorned with golden armlets taking hold of iron mace rushed behind Angada.

Then mighty Yupaksha, and Prajaghna for his part in fury assailed mighty Angada's chariot.

Angada, the foremost of Vanaras, coming between both Sonitaksha and Prajaghna shone like a full moon between the Visakha stars.

Both Mainda and Dwivida (maternal uncles of Angada) took position for the protection of one another facing the enemy.

Rakshasas wielding swords and mace, endowed with stupendous strength and of huge body agitated and assailed Vanaras.

A momentous war took place between the three Rakshasas (Prajaghna, Yupaksha and Sonitaksha) and Vanara chiefs (Angada, Dwivida and Mainda) that caused horripilation.

In the comb at the Vanaras seizing hold of trees hurled violently and mighty Prajaghna with his sword shattered them

In that war the Vanaras hurled trees, rocks on chariots and horses and Yupaksha encountered them and tore them.

Heroic and courageous Sonitaksha tore the trees hurled by Dwivida and Mainda in midway by his mace and crushed them.

Prajaghna taking up a huge sword went forward swiftly and assailed Angada.

Then Vanara leader Angada who was endowed with extraordinary strength, seeing Prajaghna of stupendous power coming forward, hit him with Aswakarna tree.

Angada hit the shoulder of Prajaghna which held the sword, with his fist. By that blow the sword got broken and dropped down

Seeing the pestle shaped sword fallen on the ground, mighty Prajaghna clenched his fist, which was as hard as the thunderbolt.

Sonitaksha of extraordinary energy hit at the forehead of highly valiant Angada. For a while Angada was unable to move.

Son of Vali, who was full of vigour, on regaining consciousness hit Prajaghna on the head and trunk and made him fall down.

Instantly alighting from the chariot, Yupaksha seeing the uncle exhausted and hurt, eyes filled with tears, he wielded the sword.

Observing Yupakasha fallen and rushing quickly, furious Dwivida struck him in the bosom with force and caught him

Then seeing the brother caught, mighty Sonitaksha struck Dwivida in the bosom by a mace.

Dwivida, though mighty reeled and could not move when struck by Sonitaksha. He got up and again and snatched the mace from Sonithaksha.

In the meantime, valiant Vanara leader Mainda arrived and struck with his palm on the chest of Yupaksha.

In that fight, courageous Sonitaksha and Yupaksha contested with the two monkeys pulling one another violently and throwing intensely.

Valiant Dwivida, for his part, tore Sonitaksha on his face with his nails, and quickening his pace threw him on the surface of the ground and bruised him.

Vanara leader, Mainda on his part, angrily pierced Yupaksha many times who fell on the ground dead.

Then many heroes died, Rakshasa king's army was distressed and went towards where Kumbhakarna's son was fighting.

Kumbha quickly restored the confidence of the troops. Then energetic Kumbha seeing the eminent heroes of Rakshasa army struck down, he found a favourable opportunity and drew up an excellent strategy and performed an extremely difficult deed in the battlefield.

He (Kumbha), the foremost wielder of bow, taking up the bow, remaining fully composed released arrows that resembled poisonous serpents capable of tearing the flesh.

Those best arrows fixed to the bow were shining like the cloud with flashes of lightning, and like a second bow of Indra.

Then he struck Dwivida with a golden shafted arrow that was loosened to kill by stretching the bow till the ear and released.

Struck all of a sudden, the foremost Vanara (Dwivida) alarmed, fell with legs, outstretched, trembling.

Seeing the brother shattered in the great combat, Mainda on his part seizing a huge rock rushed swiftly.

The mighty Vanara (Mainda) for his part hurled the rock to crush the Rakshasa. Kumbha attacked him with five sharp arrows and rock got broken.

Haughty Kumbha, fixed a charming arrow resembling a venomous serpent and struck at Dwivida's brother.

That blow hit the Vanara leader in his private parts, and Mainda lost consciousness and fell down.

Seeing the two maternal uncles fallen, Angada, who was endowed with great strength, attacked Kumbha, wielding a bow.

Kumbha seeing Angada advancing towards him, with five steel arrows and three shafts pierced him just as an elephant is pierced with lances.

Kumbha, a valiant hero pierced Angada continuously with several sharp and pointed arrows decked with gold.

Vali's son was not shaken by the strike, showered rain of rocks and trees on his (Kumbha) forehead.

Prosperous Kumbhakarna's son also shattered the rocks hurled on him, breaking them.

Kumbha observing the Vanara leader coming towards him attacked him with fire sticks and pierced his eyebrows.

Blood flowed from his injured eyes and his eyes got veiled by blood. Covering his eyes with one hand he took hold of a Sal tree nearby.

Compressing the trunk of the tree on the chest with one hand and bending forward a little its branches with another hand, he (Angada) tore Kumbha in that way in the great fight like an elephant.

All the Rakshasas seeing the tall tree, which was like Mandara mountain, resembling Indra's banner hurriedly was about to let loose.

Kumbha shattered Angada with seven sharp arrows capable of tearing the body. Angada, pained by that screamed and lost his senses.

Seeing the foremost Vanara, Angada who was difficult to encounter fell and like sinking into the ocean of despondency, the foremost Vanaras submitted to Rama.

On hearing that Angada was tormented in the battlefield and pained he ordered Jambavan and the best of monkey leaders to help him.

On hearing Rama's command, the enraged Vanara tigers took up bows to attack Kumbha.

Bulls among Vanaras then took trees, and rocks in hand, with their eyes red in anger started for the protection of Angada.

Jambavan, Sushena, Vegadarsi and other heroic Vanaras, full of anger also rushed to assail Kumbhakarna's son.

Perceiving that great army of Vanara leaders are advancing, Kumbha obstructed them with a volley of arrows just like a mountain obstructing the path of torrent.

The Vanara leaders could not bear the range of arrows of Kumbhaka, just as a tide can't overstep the shore of an ocean.

Seeing the Vanara army pained by the rain of arrows, Sugriva, the Lord of Vanaras having Angada in his rear, swiftly rushed and assailed Kumbhakarna's son just like a lion roaming in the mountains attacks elephants.

Mighty strong he was, uprooting Aswakarna and many other several kinds of trees he hurled at them (Rakshasas).

Frenzied Kumbhakarna's son was torn under the shower of trees that covered space with sharp arrows which was difficult to approach.

The sharp arrows aimed at the target by Kumbha covered the trees and they shone like dreadful Sataghnis.

Valiant hero, the prosperous and noble Sugriva, the chief of Vanaras did not get distressed when tormented with rain of trees.

He snatched the bow of Kumbha forcibly which was like Indra's rainbow, pulled it and broke, while tolerating the pain of the arrows.

Then Sugriva leapt into the chariot, which was a difficult deed to perform, saw Kumbha who was like an elephant and whose tusks were broken and spoke.

"Oh, elder brother of Nikumbha! Your valour, speed of your arrows, compliance, and glory is wonderful like that of Ravana's."

"You are equal to Prahlada, Bali, Indra, Kubera and Varuna in might. You alone have taken over like your father."

"Oh! mightyarmed, Kumbha! wielding pike in hand, you are a tamer of enemies, you alone are the one that gods are not able to overcome, a pre eminent one who has gained over senses, highly intelligent, exhibiting your prowess and deeds before me."

"Your uncle Ravana is able to withstand the Devas and Danavas by virtue of the boons and Kumbhakarna was able to with stand gods and demons by virtue of his courage."

Thereafter Kumbha held Sugriva's shoulders. They were like two intoxicated elephants holding one another's limbs and rubbing each other and breathing heavily. In exertion they let out from their face fire mixed with smoke.

"Just as the wonderful conflict between Indra and Sambara let the beings witness the mighty comb at between me and you."

"By an unequal deed done by you in the efficiency in the use of weapons has been exhibited. The monkey heroes of terrific valour have been made to fall."

"O Stalwart! You have not been finished by me for the fear of reproaching. You are exhausted by your deeds and resting. Having rested, witness my strength now."

Sugriva's words of flattering royalty captivated Kumbha's fire of energy, which doubled like fire fed with ghee.

Then by the trampling of their feet the earth sank down, the abode of Varuna (ocean) was agitated with rolling waves.

Then Sugriva lifted Kumbha and threw him into the ocean quickly, to show him the bottom.

By Kumbha falling into the ocean, it got swollen to the form of Vindhya and Mandara mountain and water flowed all over.

Then Kumbha hit Sugriva in anger with his fist at the speed of a thunderbolt on his chest.

The armour of Sugriva slit open, and blood flowed at high speed and excessively. The first hit of Kumbha hit the skeletal framework of Sugriva in return.

Then by the speed of the hit on Sugriva's chest by Kumbha's fist a flame burst forth like the flame of Meru Mountain.

Then mighty Sugriva, the bull among Vanaras, hit by the fist, clenched his fist adamantly.

Sugriva, the champion pressed his first which shone like the Sun encircled with rays on the chest of Kumbha.

By the blow of Sugriva, that Kumbha was pained severely and overcome by fear he fell like fire which has lost its glow.

Struck by the fist of Sugriva, the Rakshasa fell just as the glowing planet endowed with brightness accidentally fell from the sky.

Struck in the chest by Sugriva's fist, Kumbha fell down and shone like the Sun god over powered by Rudra।।

When Kumbha was killed in combat by the bull among the monkeys of terrific courage, the earth shook with mountains and the Rakshasas feared even more.  ।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेषटसप्ततितमस्सर्गः ।।  This is the end of the seventy sixth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.