All the Rakshasas of mighty strength, having heard the Lord of Rakshasas, thus spoke to their leader, greeting with folded hands.

"O King The ogres are not having political intelligence. They have submitted themselves, even though they are mighty and are having iron bars, javelins, sharp edged spears, and doubleedged swords."

The Lord of Rakshasas having spoken like that, to the Rakshasas, who were very strong, but ignorant about the enemy's strength and who were not endowed with political wisdom, spoke to Ravana, the king of Rakshasas, the following words with folded hands.

"Oh king, (our army is equipped with) iron bars, javelins, double edged swords, spears, three pointed weapons, ploughs etc."

"Why are you despondent? You have huge and mighty army strength. When you went to Bhogavathi, the Nagas were subdued in war by your mighty army."



"O King Proud of his friendship with Lord Maheshwara (Siva), that mighty ruler of the world Kubera was subdued by you in the conflict."

"Causing terrific disturbance to the hordes of Yakshas and taking them as prisoners, you have brought the great aerial chariot from mount Kailas."

"Maya, the ruler of Danavas has given his daughter (Mandodari) to you as a wife out of fear of you, O leader of Rakshasas"

"Madhu, another ruler of Danavas who was proud of his valour and difficult to approach, the husband of Kumbhinasi was subjugated by you by your offering to fight with him."

"O mighty armed king Going to the subterranean world, you won over the serpent demons Vasuki, Takshaka, Shanka and Jati and made them submit to you."

"The mighty and strong Danava warriors who had obtained boon were made to fight a war by you for one year."

"O king of Rakshasas (Those Danavas) were reduced to sub mission by resorting to your own strength. Oh subduer of enemies, many deceitful tricks were learned from them."

"O blessed king Mighty strong sons of Varuna, heroes capable of war and of all the four kinds of army have been won by you."

"Oh King Plunging into the ocean, which was in the shape of Yama's realm, with an enormous alligator in the form of rod of death, adorned with Salmali trees, turbulent with a huge wave in the form of Death 's noose, infested with Lord of Death's attendants as serpents, unassailable on account of the mighty Jwara (spirit of fever), you have obtained a great victory over the Lord of Death 's great army and the army was warded off. By your good battle all the people (of the world) were delighted.

"The earth was fully filled with Kshatriya heroes of great prowess, equal to Indra in war who stood like trees on earth."

"Raghava is not equal to them in valour, excellence and energy. Those warriors who were difficult to overcome by battle were overpowered and killed by you."

"Oh great king, you stay here calmly. Why exert yourself? This strong armed Indrajith alone can destroy those Vanaras."

"Oh Great King By performing supreme sacrifices, Indrajith obtained boons from Lord Maheswara, which are very difficult to get."



"Liberated by the command of creator Brahma, Indra the destroyer of Sambara and Vrtra entered heaven was adorned and greeted by all Devas."

"O great king You send your son, the mighty Indrajith to lead. He would destroy all those Vanaras and also Rama."

"O King This danger has come to you from ordinary people. You should not take it to heart. You shall kill Raghava."  ।।इत्यार्षेश्रीवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेसप्तमःसर्गः।।  This is the end of the seventh sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.