Immersed in grief, Raghava could not make out the words spoken by Vibheeshana.

Then Rama, who can win over enemies, picked up courage, said to Vibheeshana seated near him in front of Vanaras.

"O Lord of Rakshasas, Vibheeshana! I wish to hear the words spoken by you. You may repeat that which you wanted to convey. I wish to hear."

Vibheeshana, who was skilled in expression, spoke again as follows on hearing Raghava's words.

" After your command the army has been divided and placed at respective places as you said."

All the army forces have been collected, divided, and assigned to respective places separately.

"O great Lord! Hear me, which is yet to be submitted by me to you. You are afflicted without cause and pained at heart."

"O king! Give up this false agony which has set in. It enhances the joy of the enemy. Give up this anxiety."

"Let efforts be made to recover Sita. Let enthusiasm be restored to recover Sita. Rakshasas will be exterminated."

"Delight of Raghus! You may listen to my words of advice. Let Saumithri march ahead to Nikumbhilam accompanied by the great army. On reaching, let Lakshmana who is capable of killing Indrajith discharge venomous serpents like deadly poisonous arrows from his bow in circular form and kill Rakshasas."

"Lakshmana, being heroic received Brahmasira weapon from the creator by austerity and also horses which can course according to his will."

"Indrajith has reached Nikumbhilam accompanied by the army. If he completes the sacrifice and comes from there after completion of the sacrifice, know that we are all killed.

"O mighty armed Rama! that enemy of yours, while you have not reached Nikumbhilam and not propitiated fire sacrifice, can cause your death. Such a boon was granted to him, the enemy of Indra by the Lord of all worlds."

Rama, you are endowed with extraordinary prowess! Order now for the destruction of Indrajith as with his death Ravana and all his kinsfolk are killed, you may know.

Hearing Vibheeshana, Rama said" the conjuring skills of Indrajith of truthful valour is known to me."

He is skilled in the use of Brahma's weapon, intelligent in conjuring, endowed with mighty prowess, and can make even varuna and Devatas unconscious.

When he moves in his chariot in the sky like the Sun coursing through clouds is difficult to know.

Knowing the wickedminded enemy of conjuring valour, Rama spoke as follows to Lakshmana, richly endowed with fame (of winning wars).

"O Lakshmana! Surrounded by the entire army of Vanara king, with Hanuman as commander in chief of the army, protected by Jambavan, king of Bears, put an end to the son of Ravana who is well versed in tricks."

"This great soul, night ranger (Vibheeshana) who knows his conjuring tricks well, will follow behind you with ministers."

"On hearing Raghava's words, Lakshmana of wonderful courage took up the best of bows accompanied by Vbheeshana."

Saumithri fully equipped with shields, swords, shafts, and golden bow joyfully, touched Rama's feet with reverence and spoke.

Now the arrows released from my bow will drop in Lanka, just as swans descend into lotus pond and pierce into Ravana's son.

"Today loosed from my mighty bow, the arrows will split his fierce body and kill him."

Brilliant Lakshmana, having spoken that way in front of his brother, went speedily desirous of killing Ravana's son.

Saluting the feet of the eldest brother and going round him, Laksmana proceeded to Nikumbhila sanctuary ruled by Ravana.

Lakshmana, a valourous prince having received blessings from his eldest brother, went quickly accompanied by Vibheeshana.

Then Hanuman surrounded by many thousands of Vanaras, Vibheeshana and ministers followed Lakshmana.

Lakshmana also saw Jambavan standing on the way, with a huge Vanara army surrounded while going speedily.

Lakshmana, the delight of friends, witnessed from a distance the Rakshasa army arranged in battlearray.

The tamer of enemies and delight of the Raghu race, Lakshmana stood wielding bow in hand ready to win the conjurer conferred with boon by the creator Brahma.

Accompanied by Vibheeshana, and also hero Angada, so also the son of fire god, Hanuman, Lakshmana stood together.

Lakshmana entered the crowded army resplendent with spotless weapons, countless posts, huge chariots of frightening speed, as one would enter a veil of darkness.  ।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेअदिकव्येयुद्धकाण्डेपञ्चाशीतितमस्सर्गः ।।  This is the end of the eighty fifth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.