Vibheeshana, having spoken that way, Saumithri was satisfied. Wielding a bow Saumithri went quickly with Vibheeshana.

Thereafter Vibheeshana followed Lakshmana for a small distance to the forest and showed him What to do.

Vibheeshana, the brilliant brother of Ravana, showed Lakshmana a banyan tree resembling a dark cloud, frightening to look at.

"Mighty son of Ravana having offered oblations for all beings he comes to the battlefield. (Said Vibheeshana)"

"Thereafter he becomes invisible for all beings and kills his enemies with the best of arrows and binds them."

"Before he enters the banyan tree, you destroy Indrajith, with his chariot, horses and charioteer by the flaming arrows"

Brilliant Saumithri, delighted by his friends, twanging his wonderful bow stood there, after Vibheeshana had spoken to him.

Indrajith, who was endowed with mighty prowess, armed with shield and sword, appeared like glowing gold in the chariot decorated with a post.

Lakshmana of extraordinary energy, spoke to Indrajith of the Paulastya clan," I challenge you to fight in battle directly. Fight with me."

Having spoken that way, highly energetic and strong minded Indrajith seeing Vibheeshana spoke to him harshly as follows.

"O Rakshasa! You are born here and brought up by my father. You are my father'sbrother also. How can you be hostile to your son?"

"Evil minded Vibheeshana! You are vitiating righteousness, have no value to your race, no affection to your clan, no brotherly feeling and have no righteousness."

"You are evil minded, think. You are pitiable and to be blamed for you have abandoned your own people and sought the enemy's protection."

"You do not seem to have an understanding of the difference between living with one's own people and seeking refuge from strangers. Your intellect has slackened you are not knowing."

"Even if others are virtuous and your own people are not virtuous also one should seek the refuge of one's own people. Strangers are always strangers."

"He who renounces his own kind and seeks refuge from others, will be destroyed by others whose refuge he sought when his own people are destroyed."

"O Ravana's brother! You have shown ruthlessness this way. O night ranger! Only you could exhibit this kind of manliness."

Indrajith having spoken like that, Vibheeshana replied," why do you speak like that as though you do not know my disposition?"

"Impious son of Rakshasa king! Though born in the Rakshasa clan I renounced cruel deeds and followed respectfully manliness as my primary quality. My nature is not like that of Rakshasas."

"I do not delight in cruel deeds, nor follow unrighteousness. Or else because of unfavourable disposition how can a brother be expelled by a brother?"

"The association of one who has renounced righteousness and is of sinful deeds is left by a righteous man who undoubtedly attains happiness, is like shaking of a venomous serpent from the hand."

"Seizing the property of others, uniting with others wife, evil mindedness is said to be given up like getting out of a burning house."

"Stealing the wealth of others, possessing others wife, distrusting friends, these three faults will destroy a person."

"Dreadful killing of sages, haughtiness towards deities, irascibility, anger, animosity, refractorinessall these faults will put an end to one's life. These faults have obscured my brother's future just as rainy clouds veil the mountain."

"Because of these faults your father and my brother has been abandoned by me from this Lanka. This Lanka will not be there, nor your father and you too."

"O Rakshasa! You are mean, proud of might, immoral and bound by the noose of death. Whatever you wish to say you may say."

"O Lowly Rakshasa! This worry has come to you today. Entering the banyan tree is not possible for you today."

"Clashing with Lakshmana of Kakuthsa clan is not possible for you. By waging war with Lakshmana, you will be killed and reaching the abode of the Lord of death. You will be doing tasks of deities of Devatas."

"Exhibiting your strength and proving your might using all kinds of weapons, and facing Lakshmana's arrows, however, you and your army will not return alive."  ।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेसप्ताशीतितमस्सर्गः ।।  This is the end of the eighty seventh sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.