Then Lakshmana, the tamer of enemies, sighs in anger like a serpent, fixing his arrows discharged on Rakshasa king.

On hearing the sound of the bow string of Laksmana the Lord of Rakshasa became pale in face and looked at Lakshmana.

Seeing Ravana's son, pale faced, Vibheeshana replied as follows to Saumithri who was ready for combat.

"On the basis of the indications of the pale face of Ravana's son, it is clear that he is broken at heart. No doubt about it."

Then Saumithri fitted his bow with shining arrows that were like tongues of fire, which resembled venomous serpents and discharged.

Struck by Indra's thunderbolt like arrows of Lakshmana, all sense organs of Indrajith remained excited for a short while.

Heroic son of Ravana gained consciousness in a short while and returning to normalcy saw the heroic son of Dasharatha.

He (Indrajith), enraged and eyes turned red, advancing towards Lakshmana, and approaching him again spoke in this way harshly.

"Do you not remember that in the first combat your brother bound by me had fallen on the ground. Why do you not remember my valour?"

"Formerly in the course of the first battle, the great combat, you two were laid down on ground having lost senses struck by my thunderbolt like arrows and Asani of Indra."

"Knowing my valour, you have come. Have you lost memory or do you desire to go to Yama's abode? Tell me."

"If you have not seen my courage in the first combat, now I will exhibit. Stand and fight now."

Having spoken that way, Indrajith pierced Lakshmana with seven pointed shafts and Hanuman with ten best of shafts.

Then valiant Rakshasa, doubly angry pierced well targeted hundred arrows at Vibheeshana.

Then Lakshmana, the foremost among men, seeing Indrajith not minding his action even a little, laughing said," these arrows are not causing even a little pain." Then fearless Lakshmana discharged a dreadful arrow at Indrajith.

"O Night ranger! Heroes coming for war do not strike this way. These arrows are weak, so not painful but conducive."

"Heroes seeking victory in that way do not fight". Thus speaking, Lakshmana rained arrows.

Shattered by the arrows, the shield of Indrajith covered with gold dropped in the chariot like a mass of stars from the sky.

Indrajith's shield shattered by the iron arrows, (of Lakshmana) in the combat, he seemed (bathed in blood) like the morning Sun.

Then enraged Ravana's son endowed with terrific valour pierced Lakshmana with a thousand arrows.

Lakshmana's mighty and wonderful shield also got shattered. Both took offense as well as retaliated each other moving swiftly.

Wounded all over the body in war and bathed in blood, breathing heavily again and again both of them fought vehemently.

Both heroes, being experts in fighting, tore each other with sharp arrows for long.

Both of them of terrible valour, each of them wanting to win, moving together their armour and standards torn, started emitting hot blood from their body like waterfalls gushing out.

Just as dark clouds rain from the sky at the time of dissolution, the dreadful rain of arrows set free from the bows of both Lakshmana and Indrajith caused terrific sound. Both of them fought for long and did not turn back from the battlefield or experienced any fatigue

Both of them, the best warriors, displaying their weapons again and again looking at the sky covered it with a network of arrows.

Both human and Rakshasa warriors fought an exceedingly frightening and dreadful fight over one another with agility without wasting a single arrow.

The fierce and tumultuous impact of the sound produced by their palms (clappings) could be heard separately. It was like a violent wind that had shaken.

When both of them were thus fighting, the exceedingly frightening sound that was heard was like the murmur of clouds.

Glorious and powerful heroes, determined to win over each other, wounded by the gold covered iron arrows were bleeding profusely.

In the battle the gold covered arrows fell on their body, dropped out and penetrated into the earth.

The other pointed arrows of both clashed with weapons in the sky in thousands, shattered and tore them.

In the battle the terrific arrows appeared to the eyes like kusa grass spread by the sacred fire.

The wounded bodies of the great heroes, shone like the Kimsuka and Cotton blossoms in the forest, swore off their leaves.

Indrajith and Lakshmana again and again carried out tumultuous and dreadful struggle.

In the battle Lakshmana and Indrajith striking each other had not experienced fatigue.

Great heroes, endowed with speed with a network of arrows pierced on the bodies shone like mountains overgrown with trees.

Both of them, bodies wet with blood and covered with arrows were glowing like fire and appeared bright.

Even though both, Ravana's son, and Lakshmana, fought for a long time they neither turned away from battle or experienced fatigue.

Thereafter, Vibheeshana the great self and army chief, intending welfare of Lakshmana who was invincible in battle reached there to relieve him of his fatigue and stood.  ।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेएकोननवतितमस्सर्गः ।।  This is the end of the eighty ninth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.