Lakshmana (man) and Indrajith (Rakshasa) were fond of battle and intending to win in the fight overcoming each other. Each of them were like elephants but were broken into pieces. Vibheeshana, with eagerness to witness the battle stood in the forefront of the battlefield watching the fight.

Then Vibheeshana stood with stretched bow and loosened sharp pointed arrows on Rakshasas.

Those burning arrows falling on Rakshasas touched the Rakshasas and split them like thunderbolt splitting mountains.

Followers of Vibheeshana, the foremost of Rakshasa heroes, were shattered by the pikes, swords, and sharpedged spears in the battle.

Vibheeshana surrounded by Rakshasas shone like an elephant in the midst of young elephants.

Then Vibheeshana, who is a knower of what is the right time to act spoke to Vanaras to embolden them who were eager to fight with Rakshasas.

"Oh Vanara leaders! He (Indrajith) is the only one who is left in the Rakshasa army. Why do you stand idle?"

"If this wicked Rakshasa is struck down, except Ravana all his army is killed."

"The heroic Prahastha, Nikumbha also and Kumbhakarna of mighty prowess, Kumbha also, night ranger Dum raksha, Jambumali, Mahamali, Teekshanavega, Asanibhra, Suptanga, Yagnakopa, Vajradamshtra, Rakshasas Simhadri, Arigna, Vikata, Tapana, Dama also, Praghaasa, Praghasa, Prajaghna, and Jaghan also, Durdarsha, Agniketha, heroes Rasmikethu, Vidyajihva, Dwijihwa, Suryasatru, and Rakshasas Akampana, Suparswa, Chakramali, and Rakshasas Kampana, and energetic Devanthaka and Naranthaka have been killed by you."

"You have made short of many exceedingly mighty leaders of Rakshasas and swum the ocean. You cross this hoof mark of a cow without delay."

"O Vanaras! Left over Rakshasas only to be conquered now. Rakshasas, who were proud of their might have been killed on meeting you."

"For the sake of Rama, I will strike my brother's son. Being a father, taking pity, I am helpless as it is not proper for me to take the life of my son."

"I wish to kill him, tears are clouding my eyes. Mighty armed Lakshmana will kill him. Vanaras collected together are coming near him and can destroy his attendants."

Incited by the encouraging words of Vibheeshana (Rakshasa), Vanara chiefs rejoiced and went shaking their tails.

Then the tigers among monkeys again and again roaring in seeing the clouds made several kinds of sounds like peacocks.

All the troops surrounded by Jambavan too, pierced the Rakshasas with their nails and teeth.

The Rakshasas who were endowed with mighty strength giving up fear, armed with different kinds of weapons surrounded Jambavan, the Lord of Bears.

The Rakshasas then assailed Jambvan who was destroying the Rakshasa army with axes, pointed arrows, iron bars and sharpedged spears.

Fearful and vehement battle took place between enraged Vanaras and Rakshasas making loud clamours like the battle (in the past) between Devas and asuras.

Great selfHanuman too became furious and dismounting Lakshmana from his back uprooted a sala tree from a mountain and went on exterminating thousands of Rakshasas.

Mighty Indrajith who can give tough fight to enemies gave a violent fight to his father's brother and again rushed towards Lakshmana.

In that battle the two heroes, Lakshmana and Indrajith rained streams of arrows on each other and engaged themselves in the battle.

Both the mighty and energetic heroes, covered each other with arrows just as after summer the moon and Sun are veiled frequently by clouds.

While both were fighting, due to the quickness of their hand movement, it could not be perceived whether they were taking out arrows from the quiver, drawing the string, or seizing arrows, or aiming to shoot or not. Whether they were drawing or stretching the bow or not or fixing with their fist or hitting the target or not, was not clear.

As they were discharging arrows from the bow swiftly, the arrows formed a net covering all over the sky and no object could be visible.

As Lakshmana was meeting Indrajith and Indrajith was reaching out to Lakshmana, confusion prevailed about who was hitting whom?

while both of them one over the other swiftly extended and loosened the whetted arrows continuously, the sky, shrouded with arrows, became dark.

Many hundreds of pointed arrows falling in all directions and intermediate points spread all over.

As the sun sank down, darkness enveloped, everything was dark and dreadful in appearance. Streams of blood of thousands flowed.

Carnivorous animals cried frightfully with their tongues. Wind did not blow, the fire did not glow.

Sages murmured saying" may this world be well." Gandharvas, Charanas (who came to see the battle) went distressed.

Then Saumithri pierced with four shafts all the four black horses decked in gold, of the lion of Rakshasas (Indrajith) and finished them

Then glorious Raghava with pointed bhalla furnished with beautiful plumes, splendid, deadly as Indra's thunderbolt, released and as it resounded the hit of the sword and severed the head from the body of the charioteer, who was driving in circles.

When the charioteer got killed, the brilliant son of Mandodari, played the role of charioteer and wielded the bow again.

While Indrajith was engaged with the horses in one hand and battling, his capacity was a wonder to the onlookers. Lakshmana again attacked him loosening pointed arrows at him while Indrajith was busy with his bow.

While Indrajith was moving undaunted being hurt, Lakshmana who acts with extreme alacrity and fearless easily pierced Indrajith with arrows.

Seeing the charioteer killed, Ravana's son was despondent and lost enthusiasm to fight (said people).

The Vanara leaders were joyful upon seeing the worried face of the Rakshasa and acclaimed Lakshmana.

Then the four monkey leaders, Pramati, Rabahasa, Sarabha, and Gandamadhana exhibited their intolerance and went quickly.

The four Vanaras of remarkable valour and of terrific courage getting up immediately fell on the best of the horses (of Indrajith).

Those Vanaras of huge mountain forms getting on top of those horses (of Indrajith),

The horses were mutilated, broken, and sunk into the earth and killed. Again, bounding the great chariot, they got up quickly and stood nearby Lakshmana.

Charioteer dead, horses killed that Indrajith leapt down and assailed Lakshmana by raining arrows.

Then the best of horses killed, Indrajith was returning by walk, after having discharged sharpened best of shafts, He was obstructed by Lakshmana, who closely resembled mighty Mahendra, who had powerful volley of arrows.  ।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेनवतितमस्सर्गः ।।  This is the end of the ninetieth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.