Then, having known about the distressing fall of Indrajith, the ministers of Ravana reported to the tenheaded Ravana.

"O King! Your glorious son was killed by Lakshmana with the assistance of Vibheeshana, as we were witnessing."

"Your son who has never been defeated in war, who won Indra, the ruler of gods, after fighting and fighting was killed by Lakshmana's arrows. He has ascended to the higher world."

On hearing about the enumeration of his son Indrajith's dreadful, frightening and ghastly end, Ravana gave way to swoon.

Coming to senses after a long time, the Rakshasa king Ravana, dejected with sorrow of his son's death, lost senses, lamented.

'My son who was a chief of the Rakshasa army, a mighty one, who has won even Indra, how has he become a victim of Lakshmana'?

'When angry, you could pierce with arrows even the time spirit or peak of Mandara mountain, why to speak of Lakshmana again'?

'O mighty armed! Today by virtue of time you have joined Yama and become esteemed King'.

'Killed in war for the cause of the king and treading the path of noble warriors, one attains the heaven. Even for a human it is desirable'.

'Today, seeing Indrajith killed, Devatas in heaven, guardians of the worlds, great sages would be fearless and be happy and comfortable'.

Today without Indrajith alone the three worlds (earth, heaven, and underworld) including forests are desolate, dark, and lustreless to me.

'Today in the gynaecium we will hear the cries of Rakshasa maidens like the roaring of elephants in the cave'.

'O Scourge of enemies! You have left giving up prince regent, Rakshasas, from Lanka, your mother, me, and your wife also. And went. Why'?

'O hero! My obsequies should have been done by you. It is peculiar that I have to perform'.

'While Sugriva is living, Lakshmana and Raghava also, deserting me, you have gone. Where have you gone'?

Distressed Ravana was lamenting in this way on account of his son deserting, as anger had taken over him.

By nature, he is angry. Now with the loss of his son, he was glowing like the Sun that shines brighter by the rays in summer.

Ravana's eyebrows contracted on his forehead, he shone like the waves in the great ocean with crocodiles at the time of dissolution of the universe.

As Ravana yawned in anger, fire with smoke burst forth from his mouth like Vrtra'.

Pondering over the death of his asura son, Ravana was overtaken by fury, and reviwed thinking about the destruction of Vaidehi.

By nature, Ravana's eyes are red, through the fire of anger it was even more red glowing and very dreadful.

His eyes are naturally dreadful, deluded with fire of anger his form was like Rudra's and threatening.

Just as drops of oil drop from flaming lamps, tears dropped from his enraged flaming eyes.

When he was biting on his teeth (enraged), the sound from his teeth resembled the sound of a grinder revolved round by Danavas.

Fearing Ravana who was enraged like the time of universal destruction, the Rakshasashid themselves in the very quarter he was looking.

The Rakshasas could not go near Ravana who was moving in anger in all directions like the moving and unmoving creations move when chased by the god of death.

To provoke Rakshasas for battle, an angry Ravana, the king of Rakshasas, spoke as follows.

'I have done penance for thousands of years several times and am a pleased selfborn creator'.

'By the power of the penancedone by me once, creator Brahma has given me reward, pleased with my penance. I have no fear of Asuras or Devas'.

'I was given a shield by Brahma, effulgent like the Sun which the Devas or Danavas could not break with their thunderbolt fists'.

'Today if I, with that shield mounted the chariot go for battle, who can dare to withstand me openly? Even Indra can't'.

'Let that supreme bow and the great arrows bestowed to me, by Brahma the creator who was pleased, when I fought in battle between Devas and Asuras, be brought to destroy Rama and Lakshmana today accompanied by hundreds of trumpets.'

Feeling very sad about the death of his son, cruel Ravana overpowered by anger went thinking to destroy Sita.

Redeyed Ravana, looking dreadful with a frightening face, desperate, spoke in a low voice to all Rakshasas as follows.

'My son showed the Vanaras there something which had been killed there to hoodwink as Sita."

"I myself will rejoice now in the same way (as Indarjith had done for cheating) making it true. I will destroy that lowly kshatriya, Rama's very dear Vaidehi". Having spoken like that to the ministers he took up the sword."

In a totally confused state on account of the death of his son, he went to Mythili taking the excellent sword, which was shining resembling pure sky, feeling enraged, accompanied by his wife, and surrounded by the ministers.

( As Ravana marched) the Rakshasas in the abode roared like a lion seeing enraged Ravana and embraced each other (thinking of Ravana's victory) and spoke to one another.

"Seeing Ravana, the two brothers will tremble. By Ravana's fury all the four rulers of the world (Indra, Yama, Varuna, Kubera), would have disappeared. He has struck down many other enemies in wars."

"Ravana has collected gems from the three worlds as tax. There is none equal to him in might and prowess in this world."

As the Rakshasas were talking in that manner, Ravana, deluded with anger, went fast to Vaidehi in Ashoka grove.

Highly enraged Ravana, darted just as planet Mars rushed to Rohini in the sky, even while his wellwishers were obstructing.

While irreproachable Mythili was being guarded by rakshasi women, she saw him bearing an excellent sword and crossing. When he was repeatedly stopped by friends and obstructed, he was not receding and reaching Janaka's daughter.

Thus spoke Sita filled with sorrow crying," This evil minded angry one is coming to me to kill me as though I am an orphan even though I have a protector."

'I who am devoted to my husband and this Ravana wanted me to revel with him. He has been entreated by me several times. Surely, he, having been rejected by me is dejected, filled with anger and infatuation, intends to kill me, is evident'.

'Or else, have the two brothers Rama and Lakshmana fallen to unworthy Ravana on my account'?

Many Rakshasas rejoiced, calling out their loved ones loudly, making huge noise, were heard.

Wow! Has the destruction of the two brothers brought about on account of the grief of the death of his son or on my account? Not able to kill Rama and Lakshmana, has this fierce Rakshasa who does not hesitate, resolved to kill me?

'I am a foolish woman. I did not follow Hanuman's advice and had I left mounted on his back, no doubt I would be on my husband 's lap. I did not think in this way'.

'Kausalya will think her only son has been killed in the battle. I think her heart would break'.

'She will be crying and keep remembering his birth, childhood, youth, and his rightful actions, and his charm'.

'Son killed, Kausalya will be disappointed, lost sentience will be offering obsequies, surely and enter fire or water and drown'.

'Because of the sinful resolve of hunch back Mandara, this grief has come to Kausalya surely. Let her be burnt'.

Seeing Mythili in this manner grieving, just as Rohini fell under the sway of the Mars planet in the absence of the moon, being away from her husband, Suparsva, an upright minister of Ravana who was pure and wise spoke these words of advice to the Lord of Rakshasas in spite of other ministers trying to stop him.

"You being the direct brother of Kubera (one of the guardians of the world), ten head Lord desires to seek Vaidehi in fury and kill her casting righteousness?"

"O Hero! Lord of Rakshasas! You made a vow of celibacy essential for Vedic study, so also engaged in your obligatory duties. Do you think of killing a woman?"

"O King! Mythili is endowed with charm. Your anger may be exhibited on Rama in battle (not Sita)'."

"Today being the fourteenth day of the dark fortnight, start on the next day that is the fifteenth dark day surrounded by the army and win."

"Shrewd carwarrior, you are wise. Seated in the foremost chariot with your sword, kill Dasharatha's son and attain Sita."

Accepting the righteous words of advice tendered by his friend, evil minded Ravana again went home and started to go to the council.  ।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेत्रिनवतितमस्सर्गः ।।  This is the end of the ninety third sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.