ततः thereafter, भरतः Bharata, तत्र there, पितुः father's, आलये abode, पितरम् father, अपश्यन् not seen, मातुः mother's, आलये in the abode, मातरम् mother, द्रष्टुम् to see, जगाम went.

कैकेयी Kaikeyi, प्रोषितम् sent, तं सुतम् that son, अनुप्राप्तम् who had arrived, दृष्ट्वा having seen, तदा then, हृष्टा delighted, सौवर्णम् golden, आसनम् seat, त्वक्त्वा leaving, उत्पपात sprang up.

धर्मात्मा a man of righteous conduct, सः भरतः that Bharata, श्रीविवर्जितम् devoid of cheer, स्वगृहम् his home, प्रविश्यैव on entering, जनन्याः mother's, शुभौ auspicious, चरणौ feet, प्रतिजग्राह clasped.

सा she, यशस्विनम् illustrious, तं भरतम् to Bharata, मूर्धनि on his forehead, उपाघ्राय having smelt, परिष्वज्य having hugged, अङ्के on her lap, आरोप्य made him rest, प्रष्टुम् to question, उपचक्रमे began.

आर्यकवेश्मनः from your noble grandfather's residence, च्युतस्य having left, ते to you, अद्य by now, कतिचित् how many, रात्र्यः nights, शीघ्रम् swiftly, रथेन on chariot, आपततः while moving, तव to you, अध्वश्रमः weary of journey, अपि न is not there?

﻿  पुत्र son, ते your, आर्यकः revered grandfather, सुकुशली is he doing well?, तव your, मातुलः maternal uncle, युधाजित् Yudhajit, प्रवासात् the sojourn, सुखम् is it pleasant?, मे to me, सर्वम् everything, वक्तुम् to tell, अर्हसि behoves you.

राजीवलोचनः lotuseyed, पार्थिवनन्दनः king's delight, भरतः Bharata, कैकेय्या by Kaikeyi, एवम् in this manner, प्रियम् lovingly, पृष्टः having been asked, मात्रे to his mother, सर्वम् every thing, आचष्टे narrated.

आर्यकवेश्मनः from noble grandsire's residence, च्युतस्य having left, मे to me, अद्य now, सप्तमी seventh, रात्रिः night, अम्बायाः mother's, तातः father, मे my, मातुलश्च maternal uncle, युधाजित् Yudhajit, कुशली is keeping well.

परन्तपः subduer of enemies, राजा king of Kekaya, मे to me, यत् which, धनं च wealth, रत्नं च gems, ददौ had given, that one, पथि on the way, परिश्रान्तम् अभवत् were exhausted, ततः therefore, अहम् I, पूर्वम् in advance, आगतः I came.

अहम् I, राजवाक्यहरैः by those carrying out royal orders, दूतैः messengers, त्वर्यमाणः have hastened, आगतः came, अहम् I, यत् which one, प्रष्टुम् to ask, इच्छामि wish, तत् all that, अम्बा mother, वक्तुम् to tell, अर्हति behoves you.

शयनीयः a place worthy of resting, हेमभूषितः decorated with gold, अयम् this, ते your, पर्यङ्कः couch, शून्यः is empty, अयम् च and this, इक्ष्वाकुजनः attendants of Ikshavaku, प्रहृष्टः with delight, मा to me, न प्रतिभाति does not appear.

﻿  राजा king, भूयिष्ठम् mostly, इह here, अम्बायाः mother's, निवेशने residence, भवति stays, अद्य today, तम him, अहम् I, न पश्यामि do not see, द्रष्टुम् to see, इच्छन् with a wish, इह here, आगतः came.

अम्ब O mother, पितुः father's, चरणौ both the feet, ग्रहीष्ये I shall hold, पृच्छतः thus asking, मम to me, तम् about him, आख्याहि you may tell, आहोस्वित् perchance, ज्येष्ठायाः the eldest mother's, कौशल्यायाः Kausalya's, निवेशने at her residence.

प्रजानन्ती In spite of knowing, राज्यलोभेन due to greed for kingdom, मोहिता infatuated, कैकेयी Kaikeyi, घोरम् dreadful, अप्रियम् unpleasant news, प्रियवत् as if it was pleasing, अजानन्तम् ignorant of what had transpired, तम् him (Bharata), प्रत्युवाच conveyed to him.

﻿  राजा king, महात्मा highsouled one, तेजस्वी brilliant one, यायजूकः ever engaged in performing sacrifices, सताम् for virtuous people, गतिः refuge, ते पिता your father, सर्वभूतानाम् for all living beings, या which, गतिः ultimate course, तां गतिम् that course, गतः attained.

धर्माभिजनवान् born of the righteous race, शुचिः a man of pure nature, भरतः Bharata, तत् at that, वाक्यम् words, श्रुत्वा on hearing, पितृशोकबलार्दितः shattered by the force of grief due to his father's demise, सहसा at once, भूमौ on the ground, पपात collapsed.

महबाहुः mightyarmed one, वीर्यवान् valiant, हा हतः अस्मि Alas I am finished, इति thus, कृपणाम् evoking compassion, दीनाम् pitiable, वाचम् words, उदीरयन् uttering, बाहू arms, विक्षिप्य having lifted, निपपात fell down.

ततः after that, महातेजाः radiant Bharata, शोकेन by grief, संवीतः overwhelmed, पितुः father's, मरण दुःखितः sorrowing over death, भ्रान्ताकुलितचेतनः his mind afflicted with delusion, विललाप lamented.

मे पितुः my father's, एतत् this, सुरुचिरम् lovely, शयनम् couch, पुरा formerly, तोयदात्यये at the end of the rainy season, रात्रौ in the night, अमलम् spotless, गगनम् sky, शशिनेव as though by the Moon, भाति स्म used to radiate.

धीमता sagacious, तेन by him, विहीनम् deprived of, तत् इदम् that this couch, अद्य today, शशिना by the Moon, हीनम् devoid of, व्योमेव like sky, अप्च्छुष्कः dried up by evaporation of water, सागरः इव like the sea, न विभाति is not shining.

﻿﻿  जयताम् among the victorious, वरः the foremost, कण्ठेन with throat, बाष्पम् tears, उत्सृज्य having released, वस्त्रेण with raiment, श्रीमत् auspicious, वदनम् countenance, आच्छाद्य having covered, स्वात्मना at his heart, परमपीडितः was profoundly distressed.

आर्तम् anguished, देवसङ्काशम् resembling gods, वने in the forest, परशुना by an axe, निकृत्तम् severed, सालस्य sala tree's, स्कन्धमिव like a trunk, सुतम् son, भुवि पतितम् fallen on the ground, मत्तमातङ्गसङ्काशम् like a mighty elephant, चन्द्रार्कसदृशम् similar to the Sun and the Moon, शोकार्तम् tormented by grief, तम् to him (Bharata), भुवः from the ground, उत्थापयित्वा having lifted him up, इदम् these, वचनं च words, अब्रवीत् said.

महायशः illustrious one, राजपुत्र prince, उत्तिष्ठ उत्तिष्ठ arise, arise, किं शेषे why are you lying down, सदसि in the assembly, सम्मताः worthy of honour, त्वद्विधाः like you, सन्तः learned people, न शोचन्ति हि ought not to grieve.

﻿  बुद्धिसम्पन्न intelligent, ते your, बुद्धिः wisdom, शीलश्रुतिवचोनुगा ever following virtuous conduct and scriptures, दानयज्ञाधिकारा entitled to dispense charity and perform sacrifices, अर्कस्य Sun's, मन्दिरे in the house, प्रभेव like light, (will always shine).

सः he (Bharata), बहुभिः in many ways, शोकैः with sorrow, आवृतः engulfed by, चिरं कालम् for a long time, रुदित्वा having wept, भूमौ on the ground, विपरिवृत्य च and rolled, जननीम् to his mother, इदम् these words, प्रत्युवाच replied.

राजा king, रामम् Rama, अभिषेक्ष्यति नु about to consecrate, यज्ञम् sacrifice, यक्ष्यते नु or will perform indeed, इति thinking, अहम् I, कृतसङ्कल्पः with these thoughts, हृष्टः delighted, यात्राम् journey, अयासिषम् had undertaken.

तत् इदम् all this, अन्यथा differently, भूतम् has happened, यः such me, नित्यम् always, प्रियहिते my welfare and happiness, रतम् intent on, पितरम् father, न पश्यामि I do not behold, मम my, मनः mind, व्यवदीर्णम् is shattered.

अम्ब O mother, राजा king, मयि my, अनागते even before I could return, केन व्याधिना by what ailment, अत्यगात् passed away, यैः by Rama and others, पिता father, स्वयम् personally, संस्कृतः has been offered last rites, such, रामादयः Rama and others, धन्याः are fortunate.

﻿  कीर्तिमान् illustrious, महाराजः great king, माम् me, प्राप्तम् reaching this place, न जानाति does not know, नूनम् surely, तातः father, सत्वरम् quickly, माम् me, सन्नम्य bending, मूर्ध्नि on the fore head, उपजिघ्रेत् हि would have smelt indeed( kissed).

﻿  रजसा with dust, ध्वस्तम् covered, माम् me, येन by which (hand), अभीक्ष्णम् repeatedly, परिमार्जति used to wipe away, अक्लिष्टकर्मणः of tireless actions, तातस्य father's, सुखस्पर्शः having pleasant touch, सः पाणिः that hand, क्व where is it?

यः who, मे to me, भ्राता brother, पिता father, बन्धुः relative, धीमतः wise, यस्य whose, दासः अस्मि I am a slave (of that wise man), तस्य such, अक्लिष्टकर्मणः of a man of unwearied actions, रामस्य to Rama, माम् about me, शीघ्रम् at once, आख्याहि announce.

﻿﻿  धर्मम् the ways of righteousness, जानतः one who knows, आर्यस्य of the noble person, ज्येष्ठः eldest brother, पिता भवति हि becomes father, तस्य his, पादौ feet, ग्रहीष्यामि shall hold, सः he, इदानीम् now, मम my, गतिः हि is a refuge indeed.

﻿﻿﻿  धर्मवित् conversant with virtuous conduct, धर्मनित्यश्च one who always conducts himself in a righteous manner, सत्यसन्धः fixed upon truth, दृढव्रतः firm in vows, सत्यविक्रमः one whose strength is truth, आर्यः venerable one, राजा king, मे पिता my father, किम् what, अब्रवीत् did he say (at the time of his death)?

आत्मनः relating to me, पश्चिमम् last, सन्देशम् message, साधु exactly, श्रोतुम् to listen, इच्छामि wish, इति thus, पृष्टा questioned, कैकेयी Kaikeyi, यथा तत्त्वम् as actually happened, वाक्यम् words, अब्रवीत् said.

गतिमताम् among those who attained the excellent state, वरः the foremost, महात्मा magnanimous, सः that, राजा king, रामेति O Rama, हा सीते O Sita, लक्ष्मणेति च O Lakshmana also, विलपन् lamenting, परं लोकम् to the other world, गतः went.

तव your, पिता father, महागजः like a great elephant, पाशैरिव as though by cords, कालधर्मपरिक्षिप्तः caught by the noose of fate and time, पश्चिमाम् last, इमाम् this, वाचम् words, व्याजहार uttered.

सीतया सह along with Sita, आगतम् returned, रामम् Rama, पुनः again, आगतम् arrived, महाबाहुम् mightyarmed, लक्ष्मणं च with Lakshmana, द्रक्ष्यन्ति see, ते नराः those men, सिद्धार्थाः will have their desires fulfilled.

तत् that one, श्रूत्वा on hearing, द्वितीयाप्रियशंसनात् the account of second unpleasant tidings, विषसादैव more distressed, विषण्णवदनः भूत्वा with downcast countenance, भूयः again, मातरम् mother, पप्रच्छ enquired.

﻿  धर्मात्मा righteous one, सः he, कौशल्यानन्दवर्धनः one who enhances the delight of Kausalya, भ्रात्रा with his brother, लक्ष्मणेन सह with Lakshmana too, सीतया च समम् with Sita, इदानीम् at this time, क्व where, गतः has gone?

तथा thus, पृष्टा questioned, अस्य माता his mother, सुमहत् great, विप्रियम् grievous, वाक्यम् words, प्रियशङ्कया presuming it to be pleasant, यथातत्त्वम् exact fact, आख्यातुम् to relate, उपचक्रमे commenced.

पुत्र O son, राजसुतः king's son (prince), सः that Rama, चीरवासाः attired in garments of bark, लक्ष्मणानुचरः followed by Lakshmana, वैदेह्या सह with Sita, महावनम् great forest, दण्डकान् to Dandaka, गतः हि left.

भरतः Bharata, तत् that word, श्रुत्वा having heard, स्वस्य वंशस्य his dynasty's, महात्म्यात् due to greatness, भ्रातुः his brother's, चरित्रशङ्कया doubting about unrighteous conduct, प्रष्टुम् to ascertain, समुपचक्रमे again started.

रामेण by Rama, कस्यचित् of some one or the other, ब्राह्मण धनम् wealth of brahmin, न हृतं did not seize, कच्चित् I hope not, तेन by him, आढ्यः a rich man, दरिद्रो वा or a poor one, अपापः innocent, न विहिंसितः was not tortured, कच्चित् I hope.

राजपुत्रः the prince, परदारान् another man's wife, नाभिमन्यते वा कच्चित् did not covet, I hope, सः he, Rama, भ्रूणहा like a sinner who had slain a child in embryo, दण्डकारण्ये to Dandaka forest, कस्मात् why, विवासितः has been banished.

﻿  अथ thereafter, चपला the capricious one, अस्य माता his mother, तेन by the same, स्त्री स्वभावेन with her earlier feminine disposition, तत् that, स्वकर्म her own deeds, यथातथम् faithfully, व्याहर्तुम् to tell, उपचक्रमे commenced.

महात्मना great, भरतेन by Bharata, एवम् thus, उक्ता spoken, मूढा the foolish lady, पण्डितमानिनी thinking herself to be wise, कैकेयी Kaikeyi, हृष्टा delightfully, वचनम् these words, उवाच spoke.

रामेण by Rama, कस्यचित् some one's, ब्राह्मण धनम् wealth of brahmin, किञ्चित् even a little, न हृतम् was not seized, तेन by him, आढ्यः whether rich, दरिद्रो वा or poor अपापः innocent, कश्चित् even a little, न विहिंसितः was not harmed, रामः Rama, परदारान् wife of other man, चक्षुर्भ्याम् with the eyes, न पश्यति did not see.

पुत्र O my son, मया तु by me, रामस्यैव Rama's, अभिषेचनम् consecration, श्रुत्वैव on hearing itself, पिता your father, ते for you, राज्यम् kingdom, रामस्य Rama's, विवासनं च banishment, याचितः has been asked.

ते पिता your father, सः he, स्ववृत्तिम् kept up his own promise, समास्थाय having followed, तत् that one, तथा exactly, अकरोत् performed, सहसौमित्रि along with Lakshmana, रामश्च Rama also, सीतया सह along with Sita, प्रेषितः were sent.

महायशाः renowned, महीपालः ruler of this earth, तम् that, प्रियं पुत्रम् beloved son, अपश्यन् not being able to behold, पुत्रशोक परिद्यूनः stricken by filial grief, पञ्चत्वम् the state of merger in the five elements, उपपेदिवान् obtained.

धर्मज्ञ O knower of dharma, इदानीम् now, त्वया by you, राजत्वम् kingship, अवलम्ब्यताम् take possession of, मया by me, त्वत्कृते for your sake only, एवं विधम् in this manner, इदं सर्वम् all this, कृतं हि has been done.

﻿  पुत्रक my son, शोकम् sorrow, मा आश्रय do not take recourse, सन्तापं च to remorse, मा do not take recourse, धैर्यम् courage, आश्रय take recourse, नगरी this city, त्वदधीना is under your control, अनामयम् free from obstacles, एतत् this, राज्यं च kingdom also.

तत् hence, पुत्र O my son, विधिज्ञैः by those wellversed in rules, वसिष्ठमुख्यैः headed by Vasistha, द्विजेन्द्रैः by the best of brahmins, सहितः with, राजानम् to the king, विधिना duly, शीघ्रम् quickly, सङ्काल्य performing obsequies, अदीन सत्त्वम् without getting depressed in spirit, आत्मानम् yourself, उर्व्याम् on this earth, अभिषेचयस्व get coronated.