Thus prompted by king Dasaratha, Sumantra said, "I shall relate to you the manner in which Rsyasringa was brought to the court. Listen to me along with your ministers".

The priest accompanied by ministers said to Romapada, "We have thought over a plan which will never fail."

"Rsyasringa, residing in the forest, is engrossed in the study of the Vedas. He is not acquainted with women and sensual pleasures.

By means of such things that can cause sensual pleasures and overpower the minds of men, we shall be able to bring him to the town. Let it be decided quickly (said the ministers)

Beautiful and welladorned courtesans, may be sent there. They will allure him by various means and honourably bring him here.

The king, having listened to these words, conveyed his approval saying, 'Let it be done that way'. The priests and ministers acted accordingly.

Having heard this, beautiful courtesans entered the great forest and remaining at a place not far from the hermitage made efforts to steal a sight of this son of a sage (Rsyasringa), this forest dweller, this controller of the senses.

He (Rsyasringa) was always content and never stirred out of his father's hermitage. Absorbed in penance he had never seen a woman or a man nor any of the creatures born in towns or cities right from his birth.

One day this son of Vibhandaka (Rsyasringa) accidentally came to the place where he saw the beautiful women.

Those wonderfully attired women singing with sweet voices approached the son of the sage (Rsyasringa) and saidः

'O brahman Who are you? How are you subsisting? We wish to know why you are roaming alone in this dreadful forest? Could you tell us.'

He had never seen such charming women in the forest. He developed affection towards them and a desire arose in him to speak about his father.

'My father is Vibhandaka. I am his own son. My name is Rsyasringa. I am known the world over by this name associated with my karma'.

'O auspiciouslooking women, our hermitage is nearby. I will extend to you due hospitality'.

After listening to the words of the sage's son (Rsyasringa), all the beautiful women with a desire to see the hermitage accompanied him.

Thereafter the son of ascetic respectfully received the the strangers saying, "(Accept) our offerings, here is water for washing feet and here are roots and fruits".

The anxious courtesans received the offerings and afraid of the ascetic's return, made up their minds to withdraw immediately.

'O brahmin, these are excellent fruits. May prosperity be to you. Accept them and eat them without delay.'

Then, all the courtesans embracing him with joy, offered plentiful sweetmeats and various items of food.

The lustrous (Rsyasringa) who had never tasted any food other than what was offered by the permanent forestdwellers mistook them for fruits.

The ladies apprehensive of (the arrival of) his father took leave of him on the pretext of observance of (evening) rites.

When they all departed, Kasyapa's son, the brahmin roamed (Rsyasringa) with a restless mind charged with sorrow.

On the following day, the sage armed with the power of penance, came to the place where he had seen those enticing, welladorned courtesans.

All of them were rejoiced on seeing the brahmin approaching them, came nearer to him and saidः

'O handsome one, come to our hermitage. A special, sumptuous hospitality will be extended to you', they said.

Having heard their words pleasing to the mind, he agreed to go with them. And the women took him away.

As the illustrious sage was being brought (to Anga) the god of rain (Parjanya) suddenly inundated the earth which looked cherful (with rain).

The king (Romapada) went out to welcome the ascetic, the brahmin who brought along with him rains to his country. He humbly bowed down his head and prostrated before him.

He gave that Indra among the brahmins offerings righteously with unstinted devotion and asked for his favour that he should not incur the wrath of the sage (his father Vibhandaka for having brought him to Anga).

The king entered the inner apartment, duly offered him his daughter Shanta in marriage and experienced peace and satisfaction.  Thus he (Rsyasringa) lived there, with all his desires fulfilled" (said Sumantra).  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे दशमस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the tenth sarga of Balakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.