Rsyasringa, a highly intellectual and knowledgeable one in the Vedas, pondered for a while, revived his memory and said to the king.

"I shall perform putriyeshti to help you beget sons. This is to be done in accordance with tradition for fulfilment of desires through mantras as declared in a portion of the Vedas, 'atharva siras'" .

To help Dasaratha beget sons, brilliant Rsyasringa commenced putriyeshti, a sacrifice for begetting children, by pouring oblations into sacrificial fire and chanting mantras in accordance with traditions.

All the celestial deities etc., along with gandharvas according to tradition, gathered at the sacrifice to receive their share of offerings.

All devatas assembled there as per tradition and thus addressed Lord Brahma the creator of the worldsः

"O lord a rakshasa by name Ravana who had obtained prowess through your grace is oppressing us. We are unable to punish him.

Pleased with his penance, Lord, you had granted him a boon. By honour that boon and daily endure all his cruelty.

The evilminded Ravana is inflicting pains on the three worlds. He hates the guardians of the earth and intends to assault Indra, lord of the celestials.

Because of your boon he has become unassailable and puffed with pride deties sages, yakshas, gandharvas, demons and brahmins.

The Sun does not scorch him and the wind does not blow by him. Even the ocean with its incessantly moving waves becomes still in his presence.

His dreamful appearance of that rakshasa strikes terror into us. O Lord do find some means to kill him".

After listening to the words of the devatas and reflecting over the matter, Brahma said, "Oh, the means of destruction of that wicked (rakshasa) has struck my mind".

When he asked gandharvas, yakshas, gods, demons or rakshasas should never be able to kill him, I said, "So be it".

"The rakshasa did not include man monkey and bear because of his disdain for men. As such he is fit to be destroyed by a man and not by any other means".

Having heard these pleasing words uttered by Brahma, all the devatas and maharshis were overwhelmed with joy.

At this juncture Visnu the lord of the world, highly effulgent and bearing conch, discus and mace in his hands and in yellow apparel arrived.

Lord Visnu stayed there with a composed mind after meeting Brahma Then thus spoke the devatas prostrated before Visnu and paying him homage with hymns.

"O Visnu we pray for the welfare of all the worlds. The sovereign of Ayodhya, king Dasaratha is a righteous, virtuous and generous king equal with rishis in lusture. Pray form into four and incarnate in the of four sons of his three wives, resembling hri (modesty), shree (auspiciousness), kirti (fame).

"O Visnu assuring human form, kill Ravana in the battle. He has become a source of torment to the worlds and is invincible by gods.

"That stupid rakshasa, Ravana, with his haughty prowess, is terrorising the gods, gandharvas, siddhas and great rishis.

It is reported that a cruel rakshasa with his haughty prowess has tortured rishis, gandharvas and apsaras sporting in Nandana groves.

We siddhas, gandharvas and yakshas along with ascetics, have hence come here to devise ways of his death. We take refuge in you.

O tormentor of enemies, O Visnu, you are the supreme, refuge for all of us. Resolve to be born in the world of men for the destruction of enemies of the gods (rakshasas)".

Visnu, the lord of the celestials, foremost among the gods and bowed by all in the worlds addressed the assembled devatas who were guided by the law of righteousness and were led by the grand sire, Brahma.



Lord Visnu, supreme soul having given boon to devatas in this manner, reflected as to the place where he should take birth as a man in this world of men.

Thereafter, the Lord with eyes like the lotus petal was pleased to transform himself into four forms and to choose king Dasaratha as his father.

Then along with gandharvas, groups of apsaras, rishis, rudras and devatas sang in praise of the 'Lord Slayer of Madhu', with hymns of celestial beauty.

"Therefore, uproot that mighty Ravana possessing frightful prowess, inflamed pride, limitless insolence causing agony to the three worlds, a source of vexation to ascetics and a dreadful enemy of Indra.

Kill Ravana, the cause of distress in the worlds, kill his forces and relatives. Them return to heaven protected by Indra after freeing from distress, faults and sins".  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे पञ्चदशस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the fifteenth sarga of Balakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.