Thereafter the destroyers of foes, Rama and Lakshmana offering their morning oblations on that bright dawn arrived at the bank of the river (Ganga) with Viswamitra ahead of them.

All the highminded ascetics and strict followers of vows secured an auspicious boat for them and addressed Viswamitra, sayingः

With the princes ahead of you, board the boat. Tread the safe path. Let there be no loss of time.

"Be it so", said Viswamitra and paid respect to all those sages. And accompanied by them (Rama and Lakshmana), crossed the river flowing towards the sea.

As they reached the midstream, Rama and his younger brother heard a sound greatly augmented by the speed (of the river).

Rama enquired of Viswamitra, the best of sages, "What is this tumultuous sound bursting out of the waters?"

At the words of Rama filled with curiosity, the righteous (Viswamitra) narrated the true nature of that sound.

"O tiger among men, Rama. Brahma created out of his mind a lake on mount Kailas and so that lake is called Manasa (Sarovara).

This river which flows from Manasa Sarovara is, therefore, known as 'Sarayu'. It  surrounds Ayodhya. This sacred river flows from that lake of Brahma.

When Ganga approaches this river (Sarayu), there is a clash of waters and this great noise is produced. Rama, offer respectful salutations here, with a calm mind".

Deeply religious (in nature) they both made obeisance to the two rivers and reached the southern bank and advanced with quick steps.

He who was a descendent of Ikshvaku and son of the best of kings, (Dasaratha) having seen that untrodden and dreadful forest asked the foremost of the asceticsः

"What a wonder This inaccessible forest echoes with the (shrill) chirpings of crickets It is filled with ferocious beasts and birds producing fearful sounds.

"It resounds with the frightful shricks of various kinds of birds. Lions, tigers, boars and elephants prowl about.

This forest jampacked with dhava, ashvakarna, kakubha, bilva, tinduka, patala and badari trees, how frightening this forest could be"

Viswamitra, the great sage radiating energy addressing Rama said, "O child of kakusthsa dynasty I shall tell you whose dreadful forest this is. Listen"

O best among men, formerly these two large and prosperous cities called Malada and Karusha built by celestial architects existed.

O Rama, in ancient times after killing Vritrasura, Indra was overpowered by the sin of slaying a brahmin and was affected by impurity and hunger.

Devas and rishis endowed with the wealth of asceticism bathed Indra with the (consecrated) waters (brought from all rivers) from the pitchers and got him cleansed of impurities.

With the hunger and the taint and impurity from the body of Mahendra removed at this place, the devas rejoiced.

Cleansed of his impurities and his hunger gone, Indra once again became pure. Allpowerful Indra highly pleased gave an excellent boon to that region.

Indra blessed the place saying, 'Having absorbed impurities of my body, let these places be extremely fertile and prosperous and let this be renowned throughout this world as Malada and Karusha'.

Having seen the honour bestowed on that land by the wise Indra, the gods said to him, 'Well done, Well done'.

O Destroyers of enemies these prosperous townships, Malada and Karusha looked cheerful with (bumper) crops and wealth for a long time.

Then, after a lapse of several years, O gentle one a terrible yakshini by name Tataka,  wife of intelligent Sunda, capable of assuming different forms at will, possessed of the strength of a thousand elephants and mother of a rakshasa known as Maricha armed with the power of Indra took possession of this place.

The arms (of Maricha) are round and strong. He is highly energetic. He has a large face and a huge body. In appearance, he is gigantic and possesses a dreadful form. That rakshasa always threatened the inhabitants.

"O Rama that wicked than Tataka carried on her depredations at regular intervals in these locations, Malada and Karusha.

Tataka lives at a distance of one and a half yojanas from here obstructing the path.  Since Tataka dwells in this forest, no one comes here (because of fears).

"By the strength of your arms slay this one of wicked deeds. Comply with my orders and make this country safe (and habitable).

O Rama none dare approach this country ravaged by such dreadful, intolerable yakshini.

You have been told the manner in which this fierce forest is entirely ruined by that cruel yakshini. Tell now she has not left this place".  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे चतुर्विंशतिस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the twentyfourth sarga of Balakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.