After listening to the manly command of ascetic Viswamitra, Rama, of the lineage of Raghu, the son of the foremost of men and firm in determination, replied with folded palmsः

"As I have to fulfill the command of my father and honour his words and the instruction of Kausika (Viswamitra), I shall execute it (kill Tataka) without hesitation.

In Ayodhya in the presence of elders and spiritual masters (of Dasaratha's court), I have been ordered by my magnanimous father to act according to your instructions and his words cannot be disobeyed.

As per the words of my father and the command of Viswamitra, who has the knowledge of the Brahman, I shall execute the welcome act of killing Tataka.

For the welfare of cows and brahmins and also for the good of this country, I am ready to perform such acts as commanded by you of boundless energy".

Rama, the destroyer of enemies having said so clinched the middle of the bow with his fist and filled the ten quarters with the resounding twanging of the bowstring.

The dwellers of the Tataka forest were terrified by the sound (of the bow). Tataka, was might angry and amazed.

Hearing that sound, the demoness thought for a while and senseless with anger rushed in the direction where the sound had come from.

Filled with wrath Rama saw Tataka, disfigured with a distorted face and gigantic in  size. Turning to Lakshmana he said ः

"O Lakshmana, behold, the sight of the dreadful hideous body of this yakshini will break timid hearts.

See, she is unassailable because of the strength gained through black magic. I shall cut off her ears and the tip of her nose and make her turn away.

By virtue of being a woman, she is protected. I am not inclined to slay her but take away her prowess and power of motion".

While Rama was still speaking, Tataka, incensed with fury rushed with her uplifted arms towards him roaring.

Brahmarshi Viswamitra threatened her with hunkara (menacing sound), uttering, "Auspices to the Raghavas (Rama and Lakshmana) be aupicousness and success" victorious.

Tataka raising a cloud of frightening dust left the descendants of Raghu bewildered quite for a moment.

Then invoking the power of magic, she showered extensive rain of boulders on both the descendants of Raghu. Rama was enraged at this.

Rama retaliated that mighty rain of rocks with a volley of arrows. While she was advancing towards him, he cut off her hands.

When she was tired and roaring in a nearby place with her hands chopped off, Lakshmana cut off her ears and the tip of her nose in indignation.

Capable of assuming forms at will, that yakshini intending to delude the princes through her power of magic, vanished from the sight. She then assumed various forms and released a rain of rocks. And started moving about frightfully.

On seeing them hit and thrown about by a rain of stones from all sides, the auspicious son of Gadhi, (Viswamitra) spoke these wordsः

"O Rama she does not deserve any more compassion. This yakshini who is sinful, wicked and obstructor of sacrifice will regain her strength by her magical powers ".

Kill her, for dusk is fast approaching. During evening the strength of rakshasas tends to increase and they become unassailable".

Addressed thus (by Viswamitra), Rama attacked her exhibiting his skill in targetting her by the sound and prevented with arrows the yakshini from showering stones.

.  Prevented by a multitude of arrows, she with her magical powers, advanced towards Rama and Lakshmanaroaring.

Her chest pierced with an arrow, she rushing menacingly towards them like a thunderbolt fell down dead.

Having seen the slain yakshini of terrible appearance, Indra and other celestials worshipped Rama, exclaiming "well done, well done ".

Then exceedingly pleased the thousandeyed Indra and all other delighted celestials said to Viswamitraः

"O ascetic Kausika, may prosperity be to you All devatas have been gratified by this act (of Rama) and have expressed their love for Rama.

"O Brahmarshi, you may offer to Rama, the sons of Prajapati Brishasva who are the weapons bestowed with the power that comes from truth and ascetic energy".

"O Brahmarshi following you with firmness of mind, Rama is worthy to receive the weapons. He who is a prince has to accomplish many such great tasks for the benefit of the celestials".

Having said these words, the celestials were pleased. They honoured Viswamitra and returned to their abodes from where they had come. And then dusk set in.

Then, the best of ascetics Viswamitra rejoiced over the death of Tataka, kissed the forehead of Rama (fondly) and spoke these wordsः

"O auspiciouslooking Rama tonight we shall stay here. Tomorrow morning we proceed to my hermitage".

Having heard the words of Viswamitra, Rama rejoiced and rested happily that night in the Tataka forest .

Freed from the curse from that day that forest looked charming and shone like Chitraratha Kubera's (garden).

Rama having killed the daughter of yaksha was praised by multitudes of devatas and siddhas. He stayed in the same forest with the sage. At the first glimpse of dawn, he was awakened by the sage (Viswamitra).  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे षड्विंशस्सर्गः।।7  Thus ends the twentysixth sarga of Balakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.