"O son of Raghu's dynasty (Rama) Brahmadatta got married and left for his kingdom. Now a putreshti was performed by king Kusanabha in order to beget a son.

Then, while putreshti was on Kusa the highly generous son of Brahma, said to king Kusanabha ः

"O son, a highly virtuous son named Gadhi, similar to you will be born. Because of him you will obtain everlasting fame throughtout this world".

"O Rama so saying to king Kusanabha, Kusa left through space for the eternal Brahmaloka".

After some time, a supremely righteous son by name Gadhi was born to the sagacious Kusanabha.

O son of Raghu's dynasty the highly virtuous Gadhi is my father. I am known as Kausika being born in the family of Kusa.

O Raghava adherent of best religious practices, is my elder sister well known by name Satyavati. She was bestowed in marriage to Richika.

Following her husband my highly generous sister reached heaven with her human body and down assuming the form of a sacred river, flowed Kausiki.

Conferring the benefit of the other world and worldly pleasures on men my sister Kausiki who is divine and beautiful having sacred waters took resort in Himavat mountain and started flowing from there.

O son of the Raghus', from then onwards with affection towards my sister Kausiki, I am living happily in the vicinity of Himavat mountains.

Satyavati is sacred, firmly established in truth and righteousness. She is chaste holy and best among rivers. She is known as river Kausiki.

Rama, for the sake of observance of austerity I have come to Siddhaashrama leaving her behind. Having reached here, I have fulfilled my desire through your valour.

O mightyarmed Rama since you asked me I narrated this, my origin, the history of my family and the history of this place.

O son of the Kakusthas while telling my stories, midnight has passed by. Go to sleep now. Prosperity to you. Let there be no obstacles on our way.

O son of the Raghus' the trees stand motionless, with the beasts and birds calm, all directions are pervaded with darkness.

Evening has gradually disappeared. The sky is littered with stars and planets gleaming points of light as though they are the eyes of the skies.

O Lord the Moon with his cool rays, dispelling the darkness of the earth and delighting the minds of all living beings in this world, is rising higher and higher.

All nocturnal creatures groups of yakshas and rakshasas and dreadful eaters of human flesh are moving here and there".

Having spoken thus the highly lustrous, great ascetic rested. All sages praised him,  saying, "wellsaid wellsaid"

This is the family of the Kusas, venerable always devoted to dharma, foremost of men, great like Lord Brahma.

"Highly illustrious Viswamitra, you are similar to Brahma. Among the rivers, Kausiki is the best, refurbishing the image of your dynasty".

In this way, adored by the best of ascetics, the auspicious son of Kusika, went to sleep like the lustrous Sun setting.

Rama as well as Lakshmana, with a sense of wonder went to sleep full of admiration for the great ascetic.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डेण्डे चतुस्त्रिंशस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the thirtyfourth sarga of Balakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.