Viswamitra, an offspring of Kusika having related the story (of Karthikeya) to the son of the Kakusthas (Rama) said again.

"In olden days there lived a brave and righteous king named Sagara who was ruler of Ayodhya. He was childless and desired to have children,

O Rama the daughter of the king of Vidarbha by name Kesini was Sagara's eldest wife who was righteous and truthful.

The daughter of Arishtanemi named Sumati was the second wife of Sagara and none surpassed her in charm on earth.

The king (Sagara) accompanied by his wives reached Himavat mountain and engaged himself in severe austerities on a peak called Bhriguprasravana.

When Sagara completed a hundred years in austerities, highly pleased by his performance, ascetic Bhrugu, the best among the truthful granted him a boon.

O sinless one, you will get a very great progeny, O best among men you will acquire unparalleled fame in this world.

O child, one wife will beget a son who will perpetuate your race and the other, sixty thousand sons, said Bhrugu.

Thereafter, both the daughters of the king were exceedingly delighted. Having propitiated that magnanimous asectic both of them with folded hands in supplication, saidः

O knower of Brahman which of us will beget one, and who many sons? O Brahmarshi we wish to hear. Let your words come true".

Hearing their words, highly virtuous Bhrugu made an excellent statement saying, 'In this matter, you may exercise your free will'.

'What would you wish? One son who perpetuates the race or many possessed of mighty strength endowed with fame and perseverance?' (asked Bhrugu).

"O Rama, delight of the descendants of Raghus, on hearing the words of the ascetic in the presence of king Sagara, Kesini chose the boon to have a son who perpetuates the race.

Then, Sumati (the other wife) sister of Suparna (Garuda) obtained the boon of sixty thousand sons endowed with fame and great perseverance.

O son of the Raghus the king along with his wives, having circumambulated saint Bhrugu, bowed his head in reverence, saluted him with folded hands and returned to his capital.

After lapse of some time, the eldest wife Kesini gave birth to a son wellknown by name Asamanjasa.

O best among men, Sumati gave birth to a gourdlike foetus and when it burst open, sixty thousand sons emerged.

Nurses placed all of them in pots filled with clarified butter and fostered them. They attained adolescence after a long time.

Then, after a long time Sagara's sixty thousand sons attained beauty and youth.

O best among men, delight of the Raghus (in the mean time) sagara's eldest son Asamanjasa, used to seize hold of children and throw them into the waters of river Sarayu. And while they were drowning, he was laughing.

Thus this son inclined towards evil and formenting the good citizens was banished (of the king) from the capital for his indulgence in malevolent acts.

Asamanjasa's son was Anshuman. He was valiant, beloved and courteous to every one in the world.

O best among men after a long time, a thought came to the mind of Sagara to definitely perform a sacrifice.

O Rama having determined to perform a sacrifice, he (Sagara) versed in the Vedas, started the initiatory rites for the sacrifice in the company of high priests".  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे अष्टात्रिंशस्सर्गः 2  Thus ends the thirtyeighth sarga of Balakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.