"O Rama when Sagara died, the subjects installed the highly virtuous Anshuman as king.

O descendnt of the Raghus that Anshuman became a very great monarch. He had a great son, Dilipa who became famous.

O Delight of the Raghus having vested the kingdom with Dilipa, Anshuman performed rigid penance on the sacred peak of the Himavat mountain.

O Rama highly renowned Anshuman, having lived for thirtytwo thousand years in the tapovana, turned an ascetic and attained heaven (without accomplishing his objective).

When exceedingly brilliant Dilipa heard about the death of his grandfathers, he was overtaken by grief but could not arrive at any conclusion with his intellect (regarding means of bringing down the sacred river).

How to bring about the descent of Ganga? How to perform funeral rites of the ancestors with Ganga water? How to liberate them Thus Dilipa was constantly engaged in such thoughts.

As Dilipa known for his knowledge of the soul constantly reflected righteously on (this matter of Ganga), a highly virtuous son named Bhagiratha was born to him.

Most brilliant king Dilipa ruled the kingdom for thirty thousand years performing many sacrifices.

O Tiger among men king Dilipa was unable to arrive at a conclusion regarding the  salvation of his ancestors.He was affected by illness and died.

The king (Dilipa) performed the coronation of his son Bhagiratha and reached the region of Indra as a reward for virtuous acts done by him.

O delight of the Raghus righteous Bhagiratha who was highly lustrous rajarshi was without sons. He was desirous of progeny but did not beget children.

O son of the Raghus (Rama), Bhagiratha, with a determination to bring down Ganga  entrusted the kingdom to his ministers and went to a sacred place known as Gokarna. There with arms uplifted surrounded by four fires, partaking food once a month, with his senses controlled, carried out panchatapa for a number of years.

O mightyarmed, (Rama) Bhagiratha continued in that state for a thousand years amidst rigid austerities. Lord of all creatures, Brahma was highly pleased with that illustrious king.

Thereafter, the Grandsire arrived with the gods and spoke to the noble Bhagiratha engaged in austerities.

'O distinguished one O mighty monarch O Bhagiratha of excellent vows I am pleased with your welldisciplined austerities. Ask for a boon'.

Brilliant, glorious Bhagiratha, stood before the Grandsire of all the worlds with folded palms and spoke"ः

'O Lord if you are pleased with my austerities and if they are worthy of a reward, grant me the boon whereby all the sons of Sagara will receive from me funeral rites with the waters (of Ganga)'.

'The ashes of these eminent uncles of my grandfather, immersed by the waters of Ganga may ultimately go to heaven'.

'O Lord let the progeny be perpuated in our race of the Ikshvakus. Let not that dynasty be terminated with me. This is another boon I seek'.

To this the Grandsire of all the worlds replied with a sweet voice full of good wishes and sweet words.

'O Great charioteer Bhagiratha, your desire is great. O Perpetuator of dynasty of the  Ikshvakus, let your wish be fulfilled. Prosperity to you'.

'This Hymavati (Ganga) is Himavat's eldest daughter and only lord Siva is capable to hold (the force of her descent to earth). Therefore let Siva be entreated'.

'O King Ganga's descent cannot be sustained by earth. O Hero I do not see any other person to hold her than the wielder of the trident (Siva)'.

The Creator of the worlds having thus addressed the king and conversing with Ganga went towards heaven along with devatas and maruts".  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे द्विचत्वारिंशस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the fortysecond sarga of Balakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.