Deeply distressed Diti, having come to know that the embryo had been severed into seven pieces, humbly spoke to the unassailable Indra.

"O Indra, Slayer of Balasura, because of my fault this embryo has been made into  seven pieces and rendered useless. In this matter you have not committed any fault.

This disaster to the embryo has happened contrary to expectations. Hence, I seek a favour from you. Let these seven pieces become seven guardians of marut regions (regions of the wind).

O Son, all these seven are my sons of celestial beauty.They will become pesiding deities for Vata Skandha (divisions of wind) and let them be wellknown as maruts wandering in the universe.

Among them, one will move about in Brahmaloka, another in Indraloka, and the third, well known as vayu will move around in the sky.

O best of devatas by your command the other four sons will remain celestial, and will range about in four directions.

The thousandeyed Indra, slayer of Bala, on hearing Diti's words, addressed her with folded palms, sayingः

"Everything will, no doubt, happen the way you said. Your sons will wander about as celestial beings. Prosperity to you."

"O Rama mother and sons having arrived at this conclusion in the tapovana ascended to heaven with their desire fulfilled. This is what we have heard."

"O Descendant of Kakustha (Rama) this is that country which was formerly inhabited by Indra. Here Indra attended on Diti who achieved the fruit of her austerities.

"O Tiger among men (Rama) this highly virtuous and wellknown son named Vishala was born to Ikshvakus in Alambusa. Where, a city named Vishala was built.

"O Tiger among men (Rama) this highly virtuous and wellknown son named Vishala was born to Ikshvakus in Alambusa. Where, a city named Vishala was built.

O Rama mighty Hemachandra was Vishala's son. Hemachandra's successor was the celebrated Suchandra.

O Rama son of Suchandra was Dhumraswa, wellknown Sanjaya was the son of Dhumraswa.

Prosperous and powerful Sahadeva was Sanjaya's son. Highly virtuous Kusaswa was Sahadeva's son.

Brilliant and powerful Somadatta was Kusaswa's son. That Somadatta's son was Kakutstha is wellknown.

Son of Ikshvakus, Sumati comparable to devatas, invincible and exceedingly energetic is still ruling this city.

By the grace of the Ikshvakus, all the kings of Vishala have been long lived and exalted, valiant and deeply religious.

O Rama we shall spend the right happily here. O Best among men On the tomorrow we see Janaka".

Having heard of the arrival of Viswamitra the celebrated Sumati, most brilliant chief of kings proceeded (to receive him).

Along with his spiritual preceptors and relatives he paid Viswamitra great respect,  enquired his wellbeing and saidः

"O Sage no one is more blessed than me since you have favoured me with your arrival in my country."  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे सप्तचत्वारिंशस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the fortyseventh sarga of Balakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.

