Deprived of testicles, Indra with a frightened face addressed hordes of rishis and charanas with agni in the forefront.

'I have accomplished the objective of the devatas by creating obstacles to Gautama's austerities, evoking in consequence the wrath of the magnanimous sage'.

'By his (Gautama's) wrath I have been deprived of my testicles. She (Ahalya) has been deserted by him. He has lost his ascetic energy through the pronouncement of this great curse'.

'For that reason, O rishis, charanas and great devatas it is your duty to restore my testicles for the benefit I have given you'.

'Hearing Indra, all the devatas accompanied by maruts. Lead by the Firegod devatas approached and said'ः

'This ram (which has received the share of your sacrificial offerings) has testicles. As  Indra has been deprived of his own take these testicles immediately and graft them on to Indra'.



Hearing the words of the Firegod the pitrudevatas assembled, uprooted the testicles of the ram and grafted them on to Indra.

"O Son of the Kakutsthas from then on the pitrudevatas have been accepting rams without testicles as offerings in a sacrifice, with ram's testicles fitted on to Indra.

O Son of the Raghus illustrious Gautama's power of ascetism was such that thenceforth Indra possessed the testicles of a ram.

"Most brilliant Rama therefore enter the hermitage of the pious (Gautama) and liberate this fortunate Ahalya of divine appearance (from the curse)."

In response to the words of Viswamitra Rama and Lakshmana entered the hermitage, Viswamitra in front.

Rama beheld the highly fortunate Ahalya, shining brilliantly with the power of her asceticism. She could not be seen even by men, suras or asuras joined together. She looked divine and illusory as if created with special efforts by Brahma. Though not clearly visible, she was shining bright like the light of the full Moon muffled by mists in the sky and like the inviolable light of the Sun reflected in the water.

By the words of Gautama, she became invisible to the three worlds till the appearance of Rama.

With the expiry of the period of the curse, the Raghavas (Rama and Lakshmana) speared and she became perceptible when Rama touched her feet.

Recalling the words of Gautama, she received them with water to wash their feet and offerings made with due devotion Rama accepted her hospitality extended in accordance tradition.

Amidst sounds of celestial kettledrums, devatas showered flowers, gandharvas sang and apsarasa danced. There was a great assemblage (of divinities).

On seeing Ahalya, her body purified by the power of penance at Gautama's command, the devatas worshipfully exclaimed, 'Excellent, Excellent'

Brilliant Gautam, the great ascetic, along with Ahalya, worshipped Rama according to tradition, with delight and continued with his austerities.

Having received due hospitality from the great ascetic Gautama Rama also set out towards Mithila.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे एकोनपञ्चाशस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the fortyninth sarga of Balakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic  composed by sage Valmiki.