Thereafter, Vasishta having seen the forces tortured and overpowered by the weapons of Viswamitra said, "O Kamadhenu create additional forces through your yogic power."

"From her lowing Kambhojas bright like the Sun, from the udder Paplavas, weapons in hand, from the vagina Yavanas, from the anus Sakas, from the roots of the hair Mlecchas along with Kiratas and Haritas were born.

O descendant of the Raghus, Viswamitra's army consisting of infantry, elephants, horses, chariots has been entirely destroyed by them instantly.

Having seen the army destroyed by the powerful Vasishta, one hundred sons of Viswamitra became extremely furious and armed with various kinds of weapons rushed towards Vasishta, the best among ascetics. Adorable sage Vasishta, reduced them to ashes with just a 'humkara' (the loud 'hum' sound produced with the mouth)

Then one hundred sons of Viswamitra together with their horses, chariots and foot soldiers were reduced to ashes in a moment by the powerful Vasishta.

Seeing his sons and army destroyed the illustrious Viswamitra was filled with shame and anxiety.

Like the ocean without waves or the snake bereft of fangs or the Sun eclipsed by Rahu, suddenly (Viswamitra) looked cheerless and dull.

Having lost his sons and the army, like a bird with wings clipped, wretched, with pride vanished and confidence shattered Viswamitra fell into despondency.

Viswamitra, having entrusted one of his remaining sons to rule the kingdom in accordance with the kshatriya tradition reached the forest.

Mighty ascetic Viswamitra, reached the slopes of the Himavat mountain inhabited by kinnaras and uragas (serpents) and performed austerities in order to propitiate lord Mahadeva.

After some time, lord of the gods, bestower of boons, Maheswara with the symbol of the bull on the banner appeared before mighty Viswamitra.

O King what are you performing the penance for? Tell me what you want? I am bestower of boons. Speak out you desire (said Lord Siva).

Having heard this from the god, Viswamitra who performed the great austerities prostrated before Mahadeva and said these words.

O Irreproachable one O Mahadeva if you are pleased with me, make me an expert in Dhanurveda, the science of archery with all it secrets, angas (branches), upangas (subdivisions) and Upanishads.

O Irreproachable one whatever weapons are known to devatas, danavas, maharshis, gandharvas, yakshas, rakshasas, be revealed to me.

O Lord of the gods by your favour let my desire be fulfilled. Lord Mahadeva having saidः 'Be it so' vanished.

Rajarshi Viswamitra endowed with supreme power became very haughty. Having obtained the weapons, his insolence was greatly accentuated.

Like the sea during the full moon, with his increased power (blessed with the invincible strength of the weapons) Viswamitra thought the foremost of ascetics Vasishta was (already) slain. (It shows the height of the king's ignorance and arrogance).

Thereafter king Viswamitra having proceeded towards the hermitage (of Vasishta) and released the weapons by the energy of which the entire forest of the ascetics was burnt down.

On seeing the weapons discharged by the intelligent Viswamitra saints in hundreds fled in all directions.

The disciples of Vasishta as well as animals and birds got terrified by the fear and fled in their thousands in all directions.

The greatsoul Vasishta's hermitage became deserted and silent in an instant like a barren field.

Even while Vasistha was repeatedly assuring the saints saying "Do not fear, I will now  destroy Viswamitra, son of Gadhi just as the Sun dispels the morning mist (they fled)".

The infuriated Vasishta who was highly brilliant, foremost among those who meditate said to Viswamitraः

"O Fool this hermitage has been developed over a long time. Why did you destroy it? On account of your wickedness you will not live long."

Exceedingly furious Vasishta quickly lifted up his staff which looked like the staff of Yama (the od of death), like smokeless fire at the time of destruction of the worlds.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे पञ्चपञ्चाशस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the fiftyfifth sarga of Balakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.