"O Rambha you must entice Viswamitra by lust and passion. This important work  must be done by you in the interest of the gods".

O Rama, to these words of the sagacious, thousandeyed Lord of the gods (Indra) that apsara with folded hands bashfully repliedः

'Lord of the devatas this mighty ascetic Viswamitra is a terrible person. He will ceratinly release on his dreadful anger (curse me). O Lord this is my apprehension. You should excuse me'.

O Rama having heard Rambha trembling in fear and standing with folded palms, Indra spokeः

'O Rambha have no fear. Feel safe. Carry out my order. When the trees look so beautiful in spring I shall in captivating the form of a cuckoo, stay by your side in the company of Kamadeva (Cupid).

O Rambha displaying many (romantic) gestures and assuming a fascinating form, distract the mighty ascetic, Kausika (Viswamitra)'.

At these words (of Indra), Rambha, assumed any form of excellent beauty and with a bright smile set out to allure Viswamitra.

Excited by the charming warble of the cuckoo, Viswamitra opened his eyes.

On hearing the sound of the incomparable song of the cuckoo along with the sight of Rambha, a doubt arose in the mind of the ascetic.

Son of Kushika, the eminent ascetic knew it was the work of Indra. Seized with anger,  he cursed Rambhaः

'O luckless Rambha, since you have endeavoured to distract me from my desire to conquer wrath and passion, you shall turn into a rock and remain so for ten thousand years'.

'O Rambha an effulgent brahmin, endowed with the power of asceticism, will liberate you from this state into which you have fallen on account of my anger'.

The brilliant Viswamitra, the great ascetic, now experienced remorse for his inability to contain anger.

This mighty curse, of the great saint transformed Rambha into a rock and sent Kamadeva and Indra to their heels.

"O Rama highly powerful Viswamitra was deprived of his ascetic merit due to his  anger. He had no peace of mind for his inability to control his senses.

Having been deprived of his ascetic merit, he resolved not to lose his temper nor ever breathe a word".

"Further, I shall not even inhale for hundreds of years. I shall conquer my senses and dry up this body.

Until brahminhood is obtained by my austerities, I shall stay without breathing or eating for innumerable years. While performing penance, my limbs shall not undergo deterioration".

"O Descendant of Raghu in this way that eminent ascetic took an unprecedented vow to practise penance for a thousand years".  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे चतुष्षष्टितमस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the sixtyfourth sarga of Balakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.