The ministers of the great descendent of the Ikshvakus were endowed with all virtues. They were competent counsellors, skilled in judging motives from facial features and were always intent on doing good and all that was dear and helpful to the king.

The mighty and glorious (king Dasaratha) had eight ministers who were free from blemish in their dealings and ever devoted to royal duties.

The eight ministers were Dhrishti, Jayanta,Vijaya, Siddhartha, Arthasadhaka, Ashoka, Mantrapala and Sumantra.

He had two wellchosen excellent rishis, Vasishta and Vamadeva, as family priests besides some other counsellors.

They were welleducated in all branches of knowledge and deemed unjust acts shameful. They were renowned, proficient, versed in sastras, wealthy and magnanimous. They had their senses restrained and their deeds were in accordance with their words. They acted with determination. They were brilliant, forgiving and reputed. And always spoke with a smile.

Either in anger or for pecuniary gains or for fulfilment of desire, they never uttered an untrue or unjust word. In the midst of their own people or among their enemies, they knew, through spies everything being done or had been done or intended to be done in future.

They knew how to deal (with people). They were true to their friends. They used to impose appropriate punishment even on their own sons.

They were experts in replenishing the exchequer and in collecting the army. They never inflicted any punishment even on those who were not their wellwishers, if they did not commit any offence.

They were heroic. They possessed steady perseverance. They followed the state policy and always protected the virtuous people living in the state.

While ensuring that they did not cause pain to brahmanas and kshatriyas (in thought, word and deed), they filled the treasury. They inflicted stringent punishments on a man after examining his strength and weakness.

While the ministers of chaste conduct administered the kingdom with unanimous decisions, there was no one who was a liar, either in the city or in the kingdom.

In that kingdom no one was wicked or enamoured of others' wives. Serenity prevailed over the entire kingdom including the city of excellence.

They all were welldressed in fine clothes. They possessed good character with an eye on justice and vigilant about the king's welfare.

They imbibed virtues from the elderlies. They were renowned in prowess. They were guided by their intellect in all affairs. They were wellknown everywhere.

The ministers were inherently well aware of the real nature of peace or war. They were affluent, adept in keeping secrecy and sharp in comprehending the points (before making any decision). They were experts in the science of ethics and morality. They always spoke pleasing words.

The faultless king Dasaratha, with the assistance of such ministers endowed with virtues, ruled the earth.

In the three worlds he (Dasaratha) was acclaimed in the three words as munificient and upholder of truth, a tiger among men, who ruled protecting and guarding the people through spies. He. ruled the kingdom with righteousness by deserting irreligious and keeping the subjects happy.

The king (Dasaratha) had many friends. All the tributary kings were obedient to him. He killed his enemies with his might. There was no foe who was either superior to or equal to him. He ruled the world as Indra ruled the heaven.

Accompanied by the ministers who were devoted to his welfare, adept in counselling, skilful, capable and loyal towards him, the king acquired glory like the rising Sun with luminous rays.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे सप्तमस्सर्गः ।।  Thus ends the seventh sarga of Balakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.