Rama with his brother Lakshmana having consoled Bharata who is ever devoted to elders began to questionः

I want to hear what brought you to this region with your barkrobes, matted locks and antelope skin.

What made you come to this region, leaving the kingdom and wearing deer skin and matted hair? You should tell me everything.

Thus enquired by the magnanimous Rama, Bharata, joining his palms tightly, repliedः

O my revered sire our mighty father, having performed an impossible task of banishing you to the forest, and tortured by grief due to separation from his son, went to heaven.

O Rama, tormentor of enemies having been instigated by a woman, my mother  Kaikeyi, committed this great sin of destroying his (Dasaratha's) reputation.

My mother, formented with grief and with the fruit of the kingdom forfeited, and cursed with widowhood, will fall into the dreadful hell.

It behoves you to grant me a favour. I am like your servant. Now get yourself coronated in the kingdom like Indra.

All these subjects and your widowed mothers have come to you. It behoves you to grant them this favour.

O bestower of honour by the law of primogeniture and as a worthy successor it is appropriate that you should accept the kingdom righteously and fulfil the desire of your friends.

Like an autumnal night with the immaculate Moon, let this entire earth cease to be a widow by securing you as her lord.

With my head bowed down, I beseech you along with all these ministers to show favour to me who is your brother, disciple and slave.

O best among men, it does not behove you to transgress the prayers of the whole order of subjects and ministers to assume this hereditary and perpetual order.

Having said thus, the mightyarmed Bharata, in accordance with tradition, grasped with tearful eyes the feet of Rama again with his head.

Rama embraced his brother Bharata who repeatedly heaved sighs and resembled an  elephant in rut, and saidः

How can a man like you, born of a noble race, endowed with energy, powerful and adherent to vows, commit a sin for the sake of a kingdom?

O destroyer of enemies, I do not find even slightest fault with you. Like a child, it does not behove you to reproach your mother.

O sagacious and sinless one, it is laid down (in sastras) that elders when married can always act at their free will towards their wives and sons.

O handsome one, you should treat us the way the virtuous treat their wives, sons and disciples in this world.

O handsome one, king Dasaratha is alone competent to accommodate me in the forest wearing bark robes and antelope skin as garment or install me in the kingdom.

O best among the protectors of righteousness the honour shown to our father who is conversant with the ways of righteousness and much revered by the world ought to be shown towards our mother also.

O Bharata, I have been commanded by our righteous father and mother to go to the forest. How can any one act otherwise?

You shall rule the kingdom wellhonoured by the people in Ayodhya and I shall live in Dandaka forest wearing bark as garments.

The maharja of great radiance made this division in the presence of people and after commanding thus, ascended heaven.

The proclamation of that righteous king revered by the world shall be your guide. You  should enjoy that portion bestowed by father.

O handsome one, as for myself, I shall enjoy the portion bestowed on me by my magnanimous father and shall take refuge in the Dandaka forest for fourteen years.

I think what my great father, who is honoured by all men, and an equal to Indra, ordered is for my highest welfare. The will of the overlord of the world should not be done away with.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे चतुरुत्तरशततमस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the one hundredfourth sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.