That night passed off painfully for the four lion like brothers as they lamented, surrounded by their hosts of friends.

When the night dawned, those brothers surrounded by their friends made (morning) ablutions and, after the prayers, returned to Rama.

All of them sat together silently and no one uttered a word. Bharata alone from among them addressed Rama sayingः

This kingdom was given to me for the satisfaction of my mother. I am bestowing it back on you. Enjoy it without any obstacles.

Like a dyke bursts under pressure by the great surge of waters during the rainy season, this vast kingdom cannot be sustained by any one except yourself.

O lord of the earth as an ass cannot follow the pace of a horse or a bird, the pace of Tarkshya (Garuda), I do not have the capability to follow you.

O Rama, the life of a man on whom others depend for their sustenance is a happy life and the life of one who depends on others for his own mintenance is miserable.

O mightyarmed Rama, a man plants a tree, rears it till it grows into such a large tree with a big trunk that it becomes difficult for a dwarf to climb. When the tree flowers but does not bear fruit, the man who planted it gets no pleasure out of the purpose for which the tree was planted. Being a mighty protector, do not chastise us who are your  servants. This is a simile. You may better comprehend its implications.  (The meaning of the simile is that if you do not assume the throne, the desire of our father, who nurtured you right from your childhood and hoped that one day you will become king and rule the people, will be in vain.)

O great king and subduer of enemies, may all the leading guilds of traders and other subjects behold you all over installed in the kingdom like the resplendent Sun.

O Rama, let the elephants following you, intoxicated with ichor, be heard trumpeting. Let the women of the inner apartment rejoice with composed minds (when they hear of your return).

Hearing the words of Bharata beseeching Rama to return, various classes of people of the city of Ayodhya, in approbation exclaimed well said.

Having seen the illustrious Bharata lamenting that way, Rama, a man of firm determination and selfpossession, consoled him thusः

A man is neither independent nor competent to do any act on his free will. Fate pulls him this way or the other.

All accumulations of wealth deplete at the end. Every man who attains elevated positions falls at the end. Every union culminates in separation. Every life ends in death.

The only fear of a ripened fruit is the fear of falling down (from the tree). In the same way every man who is born has no other fear except the fear of death.

Even a house constructed with sturdy pillars gets dilapidated and ultimately decays. In the same way people under the sway of old age and death are destroyed (at last).

A night that once passe off does not return like the waters of river Yamuna that flow  into the ocean filled with water (the water do not flow back into Yamuna).

The passing days and nights quickly decrease the life span of all living beings in this world, like sunrays drying up the water in summer.

Whether you are static or moving, your lifespan decreases. Therefore, you should only grieve about yourself and not for any one else.

Death follows a man wherever he goes. When he sits, death sits with him. Even after travelling a very long distance, the man returns along with death.

Wrinkels form on the body and hair turns grey in old age. In this way, decayed with age, what can a man do to have control over death.

People rejoice when the Sun rises and rejoice when the Sun sets. But they are unaware of the decline of the life span of their own.

At the advent of each new season men feel delighted to see the newly blossomed  flowers and fruits. But with the change of the scasons the life span also diminishes.

In a mighty ocean, two pieces of logs meet one another, float together and in due course get separated. In the same way wives, sons, relatives and riches remain together for some time and thereafter get separated. Their separation is certain.

In a mighty ocean, two pieces of logs meet one another, float together and in due course get separated. In the same way wives, sons, relatives and riches remain together for some time and thereafter get separated. Their separation is certain.

No living being in this world can act as he likes. Therefore, no one should grieve for the dead.

Like a man standing on the wayside says to a passing caravan, 'I am following you', and follows them, the road taken by our fathers and forefathers is certain for every one and cannot be violated by a person treading that path. (So) why should a man grieve?

Like the flow of water which never reverts to its source, age passes. Therefore, a man must employ his self in righteous acts that bring him happiness. By doing so, it is said, people will always be happy.

Our righteous father and lord of the earth, Dasaratha, attained heaven by giving  abundant charities and performing several sacrifices in accordance with tradition.

Our father nourished his dependents, splendidly governed his subjects and accepted wealth through righteous ways. Because of these pious acts, he could go to heaven.

Dasaratha, our father and lord of the earth, reached heaven by performing auspicious acts and offering abundant charities in sacrifices.

King Dasaratha, lord of the earth, having performed various kinds of sacrifices and securing a long life, enjoyed abundance of pleasures and attained heaven.

O dear our father, king Dasaratha, who was honoured by the virtuous and enjoyed the best of pleasures attained heaven after a long life. Therefore, he is not to be grieved over.

Our father, king Dasaratha, abandoned the wornout mortal body, and obtained divine prosperity of wandering in the world of Brahma.

No one like you or me should ever mourn about this highly sagacious and learned king who was proficient in scriptural knowledge.

A wise man, holding on to his fortitude in all circumstances, should avoid such occasions of grief, these words of lamentation and this crying.

O foremost of the eloquent, compose yourself. Do not grieve. Return to the city (Ayodhya) and reside there. You have been commanded so by our father who was a man of selfcontrol.

I shall also stick to the command of our noble father who was a man of sacred deeds.

O subduer of enemies, I cannot violate the order of the king. You also must respect it for he is our father and friend indeed.

O Bharata, I will, therefore, obey the command of our venerable father, the champion of righteousness, by living in the forest.

O best of men, if a man aspires to conquer the higher world, he should remain virtuous, compassionate and obedient to his preceptors.

O best of men, having seen the auspicious life of our father Dasaratha and his conduct, you also stick to your own duty.

Rama, the magnanimous lord, addressed his younger brother Bharata with words full of significance, saying, Obey father's command and remained silent in a moment.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे पञ्चोत्तरशततमस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the one hundredfifth sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.