Having heard the words of Bharata regarding the death of his father, Rama became unconscious.

On hearing the thunderlike words spoken by Bharata afflicting the mind, like the  thunderbolt hurled by Indra (enemy of demons) in a battle, Rama, the scorcher of enemies, stretching forth both his arms, fell down on the ground like a tree with flowering tops severed by an axe in the forest.

Those brothers on all sides, with Sita lamenting, sprinkled water on Rama, the great archer and lord of the earth who, afflicted with grief, had fallen down on the ground, and was lying like an elephant exhausted from repeatedly striking a river bank.

On regaining consciousness, shedding tears profusely, Rama again started speaking piteously.

On hearing that his father, king Dasaratha, the lord of the world had attained heaven, righteous Rama said to Bharata in conformty with his rightful conduct.

What shall I do in Ayodhya now that my father has followed the path ordained by the gods? Who will rule that Ayodhya deprived of that best of kings?

I could not even perform the last rites of that magnanimous one who died of grief on account of me. What use is my life with an unlucky birth?

O irreproachable Bharata, it is gratifying that you and Satrughna are indeed fortunate to have fulfilled your cherished desire since the king was wellhonoured by you with all the obsequial rites.

Even after the completion of my exile I do not wish to return to Ayodhya which is directionless, bereft of its chief, the king.

O subduer of enemies, when father has gone to the other world, who will guide me in Ayodhya after I complete my term of exile?

On seeing my good conduct our father used to say comforting words to me. Now  from whom can I hear such words pleasing to the ears?

Having thus spoken to Bharata, Rama, overwhelmed with grief, approached his wife Sita whose face looked like the full Moon, and said to her.

O Sita, your fatherinlaw is dead. O Lakshmana, you are deprived of your father. Bharata is relating to me the sad news that king Dasaratha has attained his heavenly abode.

While the scion of the Kakutsthas was saying thus, copious tears welled up from the eyes of all those illustrious sons of Dasaratha.

All the brothers, having consoled Rama as best they could, told him, Let the libations be offered to our father, the protector of the world.

On hearing that her fatherinlaw, king Dasaratha, had attained heaven, Sita, her eyes filled with tears could not look at her husband in the face.

Having consoled Sita, daughter of Janaka, griefstricken Rama said to Lakshmana who was also distressed with grief.

I shall go and offer libations to my magnanimous father. Go and fetch the dried pulp of ingudi fruit and an upper garment made of bark.

Let us proceed in this order -- you first, Sita second and I last. This procession in mourning is terrible indeed.

Thereafter, their constant follower Sumantra who was conversant in spiritual knowledge, a highminded person, softnatured, selfcontrolled, tranquilminded and staunchly devoted to Rama consoled him. Holding the hands of the princes, Sumantra helped their descent into the auspicious river Mandakini for taking bath.

Thereafter, their constant follower Sumantra who was conversant in spiritual knowledge, a highminded person, softnatured, selfcontrolled, tranquilminded and staunchly devoted to Rama consoled him. Holding the hands of the princes, Sumantra helped their descent into the auspicious river Mandakini for taking bath.

The illustrious brothers approached with great difficulty the swiftflowing and enchanting river Mandakini which had convenient descent and endowed with forests always in bloom. They descended at an auspicious place that was not slushy and offered libations of water saying 'O father, let these offerings be yours'.

The illustrious brothers approached with great difficulty the swiftflowing and enchanting river Mandakini which had convenient descent and endowed with forests always in bloom. They descended at an auspicious place that was not slushy and offered libations of water saying 'O father, let these offerings be yours'.

Rama, the ruler of the earth, held water with both palms cupped and, facing the south, the direction of Yama (the god of death) said these words, sobbingः

'O best of kings, you are gone to the world of the manes, and let this inexhaustible libation of pure water reach you'.

Then, the powerful scion of the Raghu race reached bank, from the bathing spot of the river Mandakini along with his brothers and offered pinda (an offering of rice flour to the departed) to his late lamented father.

Placing the balls of ingudi pulp mixed with badari fruit on a spread of darbha grass, Rama, was overcome with grief and weeping, saidः

O great king, we offer you such food as we partake now. Be pleased to accept it. For, his gods are offered the food a man takes.

Rama, the tiger among men, ascending the riverbank and proceeding on the same path (he had come), climbed the (Chitrakuta) mountain of charming slopes.

Rama, lord of the earth, reached the door of the leafhut and took Bharata and  Lakshmana in his arms.

The mountain echoed with the sound of lamentations of all the brothers along with Sita which resembled the roar of lions.

The soldiers of Bharata were alarmed on hearing the tumultuous sounds raised by those mighty brothers offering libations of water and lamenting.

They said, 'Bharata must have joined Rama. That loud noise must be their wailing over their deceased father'.

Then all of them left their camps with one single thought (of seeing Rama) in their minds and ran in the direction from where that sound emanated.

Some rode horses, some, elephants, while others mounted welldecorated chariots, while the young went on foot.

The whole multitude of people at once rushed towards the hermitage wishing to see Rama as if he had left long ago though he had gone on exile very recently.

Eager to see the union of brothers, all those people went by every sort of vehicle filled with the sounds of hooves and wheels.

The earth crushed by several vehicles, hooves (of horses) and wheels (of chariots) emitted tumultuous sounds like the sky in the gathering stormclouds.

Frightened by the sound, the elephants followed by their females, spreading all the way the odour of the ichor, moved to other forests.

Hearing that sound, hosts of boars and deer, buffaloes, serpents and apes, tigers, antelopes with ears like the cows', gavayas as well as dappled antelopes were all frightened.

Ducks, watercranes, geese, karandavas, cranes, male cuckoos and kraunchas fled senselessly in different directions.

The sky was filled with birds frightened by the sound and the earth covered with people. Both looked extremely beautiful.

All at once the people saw the illustrious Rama, the best of men, and the subduer of enemies squatting on the bare earth.

All those men with faces full of tears, reproaching Kaikeyi and Manthara (all the way), approached Rama.

Thereafter, beholding those people deeply afflicted, their eyes full of tears, Rama embraced them as if they were his own father and mother.

Rama embraced some, while others paid him obeisance. Therafter, he honoured his erstwhile companions and relations in accordance with their status.

The weeping and the tumult of those magnanimous people made the earth, sky, mountaincaves and all quarters reverberate incessantly like the beating of drums.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे द्व्युत्तरशततमस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the hundred and second sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.