Then righteous Anasuya, having heard the great story of Sita, kissed her on the forehead and embraced her with both the arms.

You have related wonderfully and sweetly your Swayamvara with each word and each syllable uttered clearly. I have heard everything as it happened. O sweetspeaking Sita, I have greatly enjoyed your story.

The resplendent Sun has set. The auspcious night is drawing near. The birds who forage far and wide for food during the day return to their nests to rest for the night. You can hear them twittering.

The sages also are returning in groups with waterpitchers filled with water and their bark robes soaked with water after their ceremonial bath.

The ascetics have duly offered oblations to the fire in Agnihotra sacrifices and the smoke, tawny like the pigeon's body, emanates wafted by the wind.

The trees with sparse leaves all over have grown dense, the quarters in the distant region are no longer discernible by the senses.

The night rangers have started moving everywhere and the deer in the penance grove are beginning to sleep around the sacred altars.

O Sita, adorned with stars, the night has commenced. You can see the moon rising in the sky spreading his mantle of light.

With my permission you may go now and be a companion of Rama. I am thoroughly contented with your story told so sweetly.

O Sita, adorn yourself in my presence. Dear child, permit me the pleasure of adorning you with these divine ornaments.

Sita, adorned, looked like the daughter of a god. She bowed at the feet of Anasuya in reverence and set out to meet Rama.

Rama, the most eloquent among men, saw Sita adorned, and rejoiced at the gifts of love given by the ascetic Anasuya.

Sita the princess of Mithila related everything to Rama and showed him the gifts of love given by ascetic Anasuya -- raiment, jewellery and garlands.

Rama the great charioteer and Lakshmana were exceedingly gratified to see the honour conferred on Sita, rare among mortals.

Thereafter, the descendant of Raghu, whose countenance resembled the Moon, having received the hospitality of the accomplished ascetics, passed that holy night in delight.

Night over, the two best men, Rama and Lakshmana, after their ablution took leave of the ascetics inhabiting the forest who offered morning oblations to the fire .

The righteous ascetics dwelling in the forest informed both Rama and Lakshmana that part of the forest infested by demons.

O Rama, this great forest is haunted by carnivorous demons who can assume any  form and by blooddrinking wild animals.

O Rama, in this great forest demons will devour the ascetics if they find them impure or intoxicated or indolent. Prevent them.

O Rama, this is the one path in the forest used by the ascetics to gather fruits. You can safely cross the otherwise impassable forest through this path.

The ascetics offered their blessings to Rama the tormentor of enemies. Thereafter,  accompanied by his wife and Lakshmana, he entered the great forest like the Sun entering the mass of clouds.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे श्रीमद्वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये चतुर्विंशत्सहस्रिकायां संहितयां श्रीमदयोध्याकाण्डे एकोनविंशत्युत्तरशततमस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the hundrednineteenth sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.