When the ascetics had departed, Rama thought over the matter well and did not like to reside there for many reasons.

It is here that Bharata, mothers along with citizens of Ayodhya have visited me. That memory soaked with grief is chasing me.

Due to the encampment of the army of the magnanimous Bharata (here), this place has been filled with the dung of horses and elephants and made exceedingly dirty.

We shall, therefore, go to some other place, having resolved thus, Rama accompanied by Sita and Lakshmana set forth.

Having reached the hermitage of the revered sage Atri, illustrious Rama prostrated before him and Atri also received him as his son.

That sage Atri himself extended to Rama the hospitality befitting him in all possible ways and treated Lakshmana and highly virtuous Sita with kind words.

Conversant in the ways of righteousness and eagaged in the welfate of all beings, sage Atri called out his aged wife who is revered by all and spoke kind words to her.

Atri, who was excellent among the sages said to his ascetic wife who was highly virtuous and an adherent of righteousness, Welcome Sita. Thereafter, he related to Rama a story about his asetic wife who follows the ways of righteousness.

O blameless one (Rama), once this world was consecutively ravaged by drought for ten years. It was the virtuous Anasuya who created roots and fruits and caused Ganga to flow. She was engaged in severe mortifications and selfimposed religious observances. She practised severe asceticism for ten thousand years bathed in her vows. Solicited on behalf of the gods, she removed all impediments and converted ten nights into one. She is like a your mother to you.

O blameless one (Rama), once this world was consecutively ravaged by drought for ten years. It was the virtuous Anasuya who created roots and fruits and caused Ganga to flow. She was engaged in severe mortifications and selfimposed religious observances. She practised severe asceticism for ten thousand years bathed in her vows. Solicited on behalf of the gods, she removed all impediments and converted ten nights into one. She is like a your mother to you.

O blameless one (Rama), once this world was consecutively ravaged by drought for ten years. It was the virtuous Anasuya who created roots and fruits and caused Ganga to flow. She was engaged in severe mortifications and selfimposed religious observances. She practised severe asceticism for ten thousand years bathed in her vows. Solicited on behalf of the gods, she removed all impediments and converted ten nights into one. She is like a your mother to you.

'She is renowned throughout this world for her deeds as Anasuya, (one who is free from anger). Aged, illustrious she is free frm anger, worthy of adoration by all beings. Let Sita approach her'.

Hearing those words of the sage, Rama said be it so and said to righteous Sita these choice words.

O princess, you have heard the message of the sage. Without delay approach the ascetic (Anasuya) for your welfare.

Having heard the words of Rama, intended for her welfare, Sita, daughter of the king of Mithila, approached the consort of Atri (Devi Anasuya), knower of righteousness, and reverently circumambulated her.

Highly chaste and fortunate Anasuya was very old and feeble. Her skin was wrinkled and her hair turned grey due to old age. Her body was constantly trembling like a plantain tree in a stormy wind. Pronouncing her name to such Anasuya, Sita made obeisance to her with utmost concentration.

Highly chaste and fortunate Anasuya was very old and feeble. Her skin was wrinkled and her hair turned grey due to old age. Her body was constantly trembling like a plantain tree in a stormy wind. Pronouncing her name to such Anasuya, Sita made obeisance to her with utmost concentration.

Sita offered her obeisance to the blameless ascetic, Anasuya, folding her palms and enquired of her wellbeing in delight.

Anasuya was delighted to see the glorious Sita who was always engaged in righteous acts and said in kind words, You are fortunate. You are observing your rightful duty.

O noble Sita, by the grace of heaven you are following Rama, forsaking your kinsmen and wealth and confining yourself to the forest.

One who is devoted to her husband, whether he be in the city or in the forest, whether he is sinful or virtuous, will attain the most prosperous worlds.

For a woman of noble nature her husband, whether he be licentious or of bad character or devoid of riches, is her supreme lord.

O Sita, on reflection I know of none who is a better friend than the husband. He, like an imperishable penance, once acquired is never lost.

Those wicked women whose minds are overpowered by carnal desires, ranging at will as lords of their husbands, do not understand about vice and virtue.

O Sita, those women under the control of unworthy acts are dislodged from the path  of righteousness and get infamy.

Women like you who are endowed with virtues and can distinguish between good and bad in this world, like those who perform virtuous deeds, will move about in heaven.

Therefore, always following your husband, upholding the traditions of chaste women, carrying out worthy and timely duties, be a virtuous wife to your husband. You will thus obtain renown and virtue.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे सप्तदशोत्तरशततमस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the hundredseventeenth sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.