After keeping his mothers in Ayodhya, the griefstricken Bharata who was firm in his vows, said to the eldersः

I take leave of all of you. I am going to Nandigrama where I shall keep company with grief on account of Rama's absence.

King Dasaratha has gone to heaven. My elder brother and guru is in the forest. I shall await his return for ruling the kingdom since he alone is the illustrious king of Ayodhya.

Hearing the auspicious words of the magnanimous Bharata the counsellors, priests including Vasistha repliedः

O Bharata, the words you have uttered out of devotion to your brother which befit  you alone are highly praiseworthy.

You are always attached to your relations, firmly established in the welfare of your brothers and are pursuing a noble path. Who would not approve of this?

On hearing the pleasing words of the counsellors which were in conformity with his desire, Bharata said to his charioteer, 'Harness my chariot'.

With a cheerful countenance illustrious Bharata paid obeisance to all his mothers and,  acompanied by Satrughna, ascended the chariot.

Highly pleased, Bharata and Satrughna ascended the chariot and, surrounded by counsellors and priests, set out speedily.

Preceded by preceptors, like Vasistha and other brahmins, all of them proceeded eastward in the direction of Nandigrama.

When Bharata left, the army with hordes of elephants, horses and chariots and inhabitants of Ayodhya followed him unbidden.

Righteous Bharata who was deeply attached to his brother proceeded speedily towards Nandigrama on the chariot bearing the sandals of Rama on his head.

Bharata entered Nandigrama quickly, alighted from the chariot and then, addressing, the preceptors, saidः

My brother gave me this kingdom as a trust. He gave me the sandals decorated with gold for securing the prosperity and security (of the kingdom).

Then Bharata placed the sandals held in trust on his head and, overcome with grief, he addressed the concourse of subjectsः

Hold the royal paresol now. This is the accepted symbol of the exalted feet of my brother. These sandals shall establish righteousness in the kingdom.

This kingdom has been given me by my brother out of affection as a trust. I shall safeguard it until Rama's return.

'I myself shall see soon Rama's feet reunited with these sandals.

The burden of this kingdom has been cast on me. On reunion with Rama, I shall hand it over to my brother, my guru and shall be engaged in his service.

Restoring the sacred sandals, the kingdom and this city of Ayodhya held as a trust by me, I shall be cleansed of the sin.

After Rama is coronated and the people are delighted and pleased, the renown and  pleasure for me will be fourfold (what is obtained from ruling the kingdom).

Thus lamenting in desolation and grief, the illustrious Bharata lived in Nandigrama along with his counsellors and started ruling the kingdom.

Bharata, the warrior and lord, wore bark garments and matted locks and lived the life of an ascetic in Nandigrama along with his army.

Bharata who was attached to his brother and ever obedient to him, fulfilled his vow. He coronated the sandals and lived at Nandigrama longing for the return of Rama.

Bharata reported everything relating to the kingdom to the sandals first. Waving the chamaras (a fan made of yak tail) himself, he held the royal parasol over them.

After the coronation of the sandals of his esteemed brother Rama, illustrious Bharata ruled the kingdom, subordianating himself to them.

Whenever an issue, however small, arose, Bharata kept the sandals informed. Whenever a valuable gift was presented, he offered it to the sandals before he accepted it.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे पञ्चदशोत्तरशततमस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the hundredfifteenth sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.