Seeing Rama angry Vasistha intercedes, saying that Jabali is wellaware of the exits and entrances of humans on earth.

O lord of the worlds, Jabali had spoken all this only with the intention to make you return (to Ayodhya). Listen I shall (now) relate to you the origin of the world.

At the beginning, all this was water from which the earth was created. Thereafter, the selfexistent Brahma along with the gods came into existence.

Then he assumed the form of a boar and uplifted the earth and created this world with his progeny of purified souls.

Eternal, changeless and imperishable Brahma arose from space and to him was born Marichi and to Marichi, Kasyapa.

Kasyapa begot Vivaswat (the Sun) and Vivaswat, Manu. This Manu was the first Prajapati to him whom was born Ikshvaku.

Manu had orginally bestowed the most prosperous earth on Ikshvaku and you know Ikshvaku was the first king of Ayodhya.

Ikshvaku had an illustrious son, wellknown as Kukshi and to Kukshi was born the heroic Vikukshi.

The son of Vikukshi was highly energetic and powerful Bana and to him was born the mightyarmed Anaranya of great renown.

When Anaranya, the best of the virtuous, was ruling the kingdom, there was no drought, no famine and not even a thief (in his kingdom).

Mightyarmed king Prithu was the son of Anaranya and Prithu was father of the great king Trishanku. That heroic Trishanku, on account of his truthfulness ascended the heaven with his physical body.

Trishanku's son was illustrious Dundhumara, father of the exceedingly powerful Yuvanaswa.

Majestic Mandhata was Yuvanasva's son and father of mighty Susandhi. Sudsandhi had two sons Dhruvasandhi and Prasenjit. Renowned Bharata, slayer of enemies, was the son of Dhruvasandhi.

Majestic Mandhata was Yuvanasva's son and father of mighty Susandhi. Sudsandhi had two sons Dhruvasandhi and Prasenjit. Renowned Bharata, slayer of enemies, was the son of Dhruvasandhi.

Mightyarmed Bharata had a son named Asita against whom the Haihayas, Talajanghas and the indomitable Sasibindus, the rival kings rose as enenmies.

Although king Asita engaged all of them in a battle, he was (defeated and) driven into exile. He retired to a delightful, tall mountain and lived a life of contentment of a sage.

Both his wives became pregnant. It is said that one of them gave the other poison (with the motive) to destroy the embryo.



O queen, you will beget a son who will be magnanimous, virtuous, renowned in the world. He will be the perpetuator of the race and destroyer of enemies.

The queen was happy. She circumambulated the sage, took leave of him and came back home. Thereafter, she gave birth to a son who had eyes like lotus petals and who  looked resplendent like Brahma.

With a motive to destroy the embryo her cowife had poisoned her. That child was born with gara or poison for which he was called Sagara.

The king Sagara performed a sacrifice on the fullmoon day. And swiftly dug the ocean that frightened the people.

We have heard that a son, Asamanja by name, was born to Sagara. For his sinful deeds he was banished by his father while he was still alive.

Valiant Anshuman was the son of Asamanja and the father of Dilipa. Dilipa's son was Bhagiratha.

To Bhagiratha was born Kakutstha, by whom your race is wellknown. A son Raghu was born to Kakutstha and hence all of you are known as Raghavas.

The illustrious son of Raghu became famous in the world under the names of Kalmasapada and Sowdasa. The curse of a sage turned him a devourer of men for  some years.

Shankhana was the famous son of Kalmashapada. Whoever challenged his prowess was routed with his entire army.

The son of Shankhana was the glorious Sudarshana, father of Agnivarna. Shighraga was the son of Agnivarna whose son was Maru. Maru's son was Prashushruva and to Prashushruva was born splendid Ambarisha. Nahusha of indisputable prowess was the son of Ambarisha whose son was the supremely righteous Nabhaga. Nabhaga had two sons, Aja and Suvrata and Aja's son was the righteous king Dasaratha.

Being the eldest son of king Dasaratha and widely known as Rama you happen to be the heir apparent. Hence, O king, accept the kingdom and look after the people.

In the line of the Ikshvakus, only the eldest son becomes king. When the eldest is living, a youger son cannot become the king. The eldest son alone is consecrated in the kingdom.

O illustrious Rama, now it does not behove you to abandon the ancient family tradition of the Raghus. Like your father rule this vast kingdom with abundance of treasures.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे दशोत्तरशततमस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the hundredtenth sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.