When Anasuya thus addressed Vaidehi who is free from any malice, she worshipped Anasuya and started speaking in a gentle tone.

It is no wonder that a noble lady like you should instruct me this way. It is known to me that a husband is a guru to his wife.

O noble lady, even if my husband is devoid of good conduct, he should be obeyed without showing any hesitation.

What to speak of a husband if he is worthy of applause for his virtues, is compassionate, a subduer of the senses, righteous and ever affectionate like a mother and a father?

Mighty Rama shows the same behaviour and treatment towards the other consorts of the king as he does towards his own mother Kausalya.

Heroic Rama is affectionate towards king Dasaratha and is conversant with righteousness. Renouncing the sense of selfrespect he honours all the women on whom his father had cast his glance even once just as his own mother.

When departing for this frightful and desolate forest, the great (advice) imparted by my motherinlaw is firmly fixed in my mind.

When I have been taught by my mother earlier, at the time of bestowal of my hand to Rama in the presence of the sacrificial fire (as witness) is etched in my mind.

O righteous one (Anasuya), after listening to your words the instructions given by my  motherinlaw and my mother are renewed (remembered again). For a woman, no other penance is laid down (in scriptures) except service to her husband.

Having served her husband (faithfully), Savitri is honoured in heaven. You also, by  following the same path of serving your husband, shall reach the heaven.

Rohini, the very best among all women and the goddess of heaven, is never seen in the sky separated from the moon even for a moment.

Execellent women such as these, firm in their vows to their husband are highly revered in the world of gods through their own meritorious deeds.

Thereafter hearing Sita's words, Anasuya affectionately kissed her forehead and said  this in order to make her happyः

O Sita of pure conduct, I have great ascetic power obtained through practising various austerities. With its strength I shall give what you want for your enjoyment.

O Sita, I am glad to hear your befitting and pleasing words. Tell me what appropriate thing you desire and I shall give you.

On hearing her words Sita was surprised. With a gentle smile she said, to Anasuya who was endowed with ascetic power, 'I think you have already granted me the  boons'.

When Sita said so, Anasuya who knew her righteous duty was immensely pleased. and replied, 'What a joy I shall make the words you have spoken come true'.

O princess of Videha, O Sita, I bestow on you this best garland of the gods, raiment, jewellery, fragrant unguents, and precious ointment for anointing your body with. All this will beautify your limbs. It is convenient (to use) and will never fade.

O daughter of Janaka, you will enhance the glory of your husband by anointing your body with this divine, fragrant unguent to your body like Lakshmi enhancing the glory of eternal Visnu.

That princess from Mithila accepted the incomparable gifts of love, the raiment, fragrant unguents, jewellery and also the garland.

Illustrious Sita accepted the gifts of love and with palms folded in reverence sat beside her, an ascetic.

Anasuya who was firm in her vows commenced to ask Sita this way about a certain tale (that was close to her heart).

O Sita, I have heard that you have been won by the illustrious Rama in the swayamvara. At least that is the story which reached my ears.

O daughter of Mithila, I would like to hear the story in detail. You should tell me the whole story as you experienced it.

'Listen' said Sita, thus addressed, and began relating the story to Anasuya, a performer of austerities.

There is a king in Mithila, Janaka by name. He is heroic and is conversant with righteousness. Engaged in the duties of a kshatriya, he is rules the earth with justice.

When he was ploughing the circular plot of land for performing a sacrifice, it is said I emerged from the earth by breaking it and therefore I became his dauhghter.

Engaged in sowing fistfuls of seeds, king Janaka found me covered with dust and  was astonished.

As he had no children, he, on his own accord, lifted me up and placing me on his lap, saying, This is my daughter, he began showering (lots of) love on me.

'O king, she is an incomparable divine being. By right she is your daughter'. These were the words (Janaka) heard from out of the sky.

Thereafter, my father and the righteous lord of Mithila was delighted in possessing me when a noble thought struck his mind.

Bestowed as the choicest one of meritorious acts on the chief queen, I was brought up by her, by nature affectionate, with the love of a mother.

When my father saw I had attained the marriageable age, he was immersed in sorrow like an indigent man who had lost all his wealth.

Even though he was an Indra on earth, as a father of an unmarried girl he would be humiliated by men who are his equal or inferior in this world.

Having perceived that the humiliation is not very far, king Janaka was plunged in a sea of sorrow like one who cannot reach the shore without a float.

The ruler of the earth knew that I was not born from a woman's womb, and could not find a suitable husband for me after deep reflection.

After constantly pondering over the matter, the wise king arrived at the decision to perform a swayamvara for his daughter.

Magnanimous Varuna out of his affection had given him, on the occasion of a great sacrifice, an excellent bow with inexhaustible arrows and a pair of quivers.

Because of its weight, no human could move that bow despite great effort nor were the kings capable of bending it even in their dreams.

My truthful father, after having acquired the bow, invited all the princes and placed the great bow before them in the assembly where he declaredः



Beholding the mighty bow resembling a mountain in weight, the kings, unable to lift it, paid their homage and left.

After a long time, resplendent Rama whose prowess was truth, arrived along with his brother Lakshman and sage Viswamitra in order to witness the sacrifice.

Having accepted the honour extended by my father, righteous Viswamitra spoke to him about those two brothers, Rama and Lakshmana.

'Both these sons of king Dasaratha wish to see the bow. Show the divine bow to prince Rama'.

At the words of that ascetic, my father brought out the bow. Mighty and valiant Rama bent it and strung it and drew it in the twinkling of an eye.

When Rama was stringing the bow with force, it was broken into two in the middle and fell down with a dreadful sound like that of thunder.

Then, my father steadfast in truth, held a vessel of pure water and declared his decision to offer me to Rama.

Then Rama did not accept the offer of my father straightaway before he knew the opinion of his father Dasaratha, king of Ayodhya.

Thereafter, my fatherinlaw, the aged king Dasaratha was invited and my father offered me to Rama known for his sagacity.

My father, on his own accord, bestowed Urmila, my younger sister of chaste and of pleasing appearance as wife to Lakshmana.

In this way my father bestowed me on Rama in that swayamvara and I remain devoted to my husband who is the foremost among the valiant in treading the path of righteousness.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे अष्टादशोत्तरशततमस्सर्गः।  Thus ends the one hundredeighteenth sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.