Vasistha, the family priest, continued to speak to Rama on righteousness.

Every man born has three preceptors. They are his teacher, father and mother.

O best of men, the father brings forth a son. The teacher imparts him wisdom.  Therefore, the teacher is considered superior.

I was preceptor to your father and also to you. O destroyer of foes, by following my words, you will not transgress the path of the virtuous.

All these learned men, guilds of merchants and the twiceborn (brahmins) of this assembly are your men. By fulfilling your duty towards them, you will never swerve  from the path of the virtuous.

Here is your aged and righteous mother. It does not behove you to deny your service to her. By obeying her, you will never deviate from the path of the virtuous.

O scion of the Raghus whose strength springs from truth and righteousness, if you accede to the prayers of Bharata, you will not ignore the call of your soul.

When Rama, the best of men, was advised personally by Vasistha, the preceptor, with sweet words, he replied to him who was sitting beside himः

The course of action the parents always adopt in respect of their son, the benefits they confer on him according to their resources, the way they lull him to sleep and clothe him, the affectionate words they always speak to him and the way they bring him up all these cannot be repaid.

The course of action the parents always adopt in respect of their son, the benefits they confer on him according to their resources, the way they lull him to sleep and clothe him, the affectionate words they always speak to him and the way they bring him up all these cannot be repaid.

King Dasaratha is my father who begot me. The promise I made him shall not prove false.

Having been addressed by Rama in this way, Bharata of great generosity, in extreme distress, addressing the charioteer who was standing nearby saidः

O charioteer, quickly spread kusa grass on the bare ground. Until my esteemed brother shows his grace, I shall lie down here -- waiting.

Like a poor brahmin, starving, my face muffled, I shall lie down in front of the hut until he agrees to return.

Bharata was mentally disturbed saw Sumantra waiting for Rama's order. Then he himself brought a heap of kusa grass and spread it on the ground.

Rama, the foremost of royal sages and highly powerful said, 'Dear Bharata, what wrong have I done that you should prevent me by lying down in front of me?'

A brahmin alone is competent in this world to prevent a person by lying down on one side (in front of him). One who is anointed king is not permitted by (scriptural) tradition to squat in protest.

O Bharata, O tiger among men, O scion of the Raghu race give up this formidable vow. Arise and quickly return to Ayodhya, the best of cities.

While remaining seated, Bharata looking all around at the inhabitants from towns and  villages, questioned them 'why don't you all persuade my esteemed brother to return'.

Those inhabitants from towns and villages replied to the magnanimous Bharata 'we know the scion of the Kakutha dynasty, Rama, very well. What he has said is proper'.

Highly distinguished Rama is firmly fixed on the command of his father. That is why we are incapable of making him return quickly.

Having understood their words, Rama said to him, 'Listen to the words of our friends who have a righteous vision.'

O mightyarmed son of the Raghus, you have heard both (them and me). Carefully think over. Arise. Touch me and sip water.

Then Bharata stood up and performed achamana (sipping of water) and said 'let the  assembly of learned men, counsellors and guildsmen hear me'.

I never asked my father to confer the kingdom on me. I never urged my mother to seek the kingdom for me. I never supported the exile of my esteemed brother Rama, who is supreme in the knowleldge of righteousness.

If it is absolutely essential to live in the forest in accordance with the command of my father, I myself shall also dwell in the forest for fourteen years.

On hearing the genuine sentiments of his brother, righteous Rama was astonished. He said to the inhabitants from towns and villagesः

Neither Bharata nor I can in any way annul anything which was sold, pledged or bought by my father during his lifetime.

As far as living in the forest is concerned it is reprehensible to keep a subsitute for me and it shall not be done. Kaikeyi has acted rightfully and my father has taken the proper decision.

I know Bharata as a man of forbearance and one who honours elders. Everything will turn out well for this great soul wedded to truth.

On returning from the forest, I shall become the supreme lord of this earth along with this virtuous brother.

The king (Dasaratha) was solicited by Kaikeyi and I shall abide. Therefore, you also release the lord of the earth, our father from the charge of falsehood.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे एकादशोत्तरशततमस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the hundredeleventh sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.