Having perceived that Rama was determined to carry out his father's command, Kausalya with her throat choked with tears said these words of pietyः

How will this righteous Rama, born to me through Dasaratha, who speaks pleasantly to all, and who has not experienced any sorrow before live on the grains gleaned?

How will Rama live on roots and fruits in the forest hereafter when his servants and attendants enjoy delicious food (here)?

Who will believe that the virtuous and affectionate scion of the Raghus is exiled this way by the king? Who will not tremble in fear to hear this?

O Rama if you, being the delight of the world, are (ordered) to go to the forest, it  has to be said certainly that destiny which rules everything is allpowerful.

After your departure, O son, an incomparably huge fire of grief with sighs of exhaustion will burst from my body, fanned by the wind of your absence and fuelled by lamentation and affliction. My wailing tears will be the oblations. My anxiety will be the great smoke rising vapour. This fire of grief will leave me very much emaciated and burn me like fire burns a forest of dead trees or a bunch of dry grass in summer.

I shall follow you wherever you go, my son, like a cow following its calf. How is it possible for a cow not to follow its wandering calf?

At these words of his mother who was deeply afflicted Rama, best among men repliedः

The king was deceived by Kaikeyi. If you also desert him after I have gone to the forest, surely he will not live.

For a woman, to desert her husband is a cruel act. You must not do that which is contemptible even to think.

As long as the king, my father, the lord of the earth, a descendant of Kakutshta lives, you shall serve him. This is eternal virtue (in a woman).

At these words of Rama, unshakable in action, auspiciouslooking Kausalya, exceedingly pleased said 'Be it so'.

Thus addressed, Rama, the foremost among upholders of righteousness, said to his mother who was in deep griefः

You and I should obey father's words. He is the king, supporter, preceptor, the best (among men) and lord and master of all of us.

Roaming the wild forest for fourteen years I shall abide by your words with supreme pleasure.

Thus addressed by Rama, the affectionate Kausalya, deeply distressed, her eyes filled with tears, said to her beloved sonः

O Rama, I am not able to live in the midst of these cowives. O descendant of Kakutstha, if you have resolved to go to the forest as per the wishes of your father take mea wild deeralong with you into the forest.

Adding his tears to his mother's who was wailing Rama said As long as a woman lives, her husband is her god and also her lord (master).

The powerful king has authority over you as well as over me. As long as he is the sagacious lord of the entire world, how can we be without a master?

Bharata, who is virtuous and speaks pleasantly to all beings and who is always  attached to righteousness will surely remain obedient to you.

After my departure, you must see that the king is not overpowered by grief for his son and struggles as little as possible.

See that the old king does not succumb to this terrible grief. Serve him with a composed mind.

A woman may be highly pious engaged in vows and fastings, but if she does not follow her husband, she will be condemned to hell.

A woman who serves her husband will attain the highest heaven even if she pays no homage to gods and abstains from worshipping them.

A wife who serves her husband and who is engaged in doing good to him is righteous. This dharma exists in this world since ancient times, declared in the Vedas and the smritis.

For my sake, O devi worship the firegod with offerings of oblations and flowers, and brahmins who are true to religious vows.

Looking forward to my return, spend your time this way with moderate intake, a mind under control and a life devoted to the service of your husband.

If my father, who is the best among the upholders of righteousness, survives till I come back, you will have your highest desires fulfilled.

To these words of Rama, Kausalya, distressed with grief for her son, replied with her eyes filled with tearsः

I am unable to dissuade you, O my brave son, from your firm resolve to go to the forest. It is surely difficult (for me) to bide time.

Go with a steadfast mind, O my son May god be gracious. Only with your return, I shall be relieved of my suffering.

O reverend one, when you come back after having accomplished your purpose, performed your vows and acquitted yourself of the debt you owe your father, I shall attain supreme happiness.

O Rama inconceivable is the course of destiny which is inciting you to go to the forest disregarding my words.

Go now, O my mightyarmed son and come back safe. And on your return, delight me with your sweet, gentle utterances.

O my dear child, how pleasing would it be, if today were to be the day of your return  from the forest when I can see you wearing matted hair and robes of bark

Seeing Rama full of auspicious qualities resolved to go to the forest and having spoken to him with the fullness of her heart, Devi Kausalya now braced herself up to perform ceremonies in the interest of Rama's wellbeing.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे चतुर्विंशस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the twentyfourth sarga of Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.