Rama, who knew his duties and was devoted to righteousness, reflected on the difficulties of forest (life) and did not agree to take Sita even though she was pleading the way she did.

Righteous Rama consoled Sita whose eyes were blurred with tears, and in order to dissuade her (from going to the forest) said againः

Born in a noble race, O Sita, you are always devoted to duty. Follow your duty, here. It will make me happy.

Do as I tell you, O delicate Sita. There are, indeed, many hardships in the forest. I shall tell you all about them. Listen to me.

Give up the desire to live in the forest, O Sita Living in the dreary jungle, it is said, has many hardships.

I am saying all this in your interest. The forest is a haven of hardships. I know of no  happiness in the forest.

It is frightening to hear the sounds of waterfalls and the roar of lions living in the mountain caves. Therefore forest life is painful (fearful).

Big, wild animals, moving about freely and sporting in the deserted forest, attack on seeing a human. Thus forest is full of danger.

The rivers, infested with crocodiles and filled with mud are difficult to cross even for elephants in rut. Hence forest life is always extremely dangerous.

.  The paths full of thorny creepers, echoing with the noise of wild fowls, and with no water (to drink) are difficult to tread. So forest is a source of suffering.

Exhausted with struggles one has to sleep at night on a bed of leaves fallen on their own on the ground. Therefore, forest life is extremely painful.

With the senses under control night and day, O Sita, one must be satisfied with the fruits fallen from trees. Therefore, forest life is full of suffering.

One has to wear robes of bark and matted hair and take to fasting as long as one can, O daughter of Mithila

One has to worship gods and ancestors according to tradition and extend hospitality to guests, (who arrive unexpectedly).

One has to wander about all the while (like an ascetic) as per the customs and take ablutions three times a day at prescribed hours. Hence life in the forest is extremely hard.

Flowers collected with one's own hands, O innocent one, should be offered on the altar as per injunction of the Vedas. Therefore (life in the) forest is difficult.

The wanderers in the jungle, O daughter of Mithila, have to be satisfied daily with whatever little food is available. So forest (life) is a hard life.

There is extreme wind and darkness, hunger and fear. Therefore forest (life) is difficult.

There are various forms of fierce reptiles fearlessly crawling on the ground. So (living in the) forest is extremely dangerous.

The serpents that live in and move like meandering rivers always obstruct the paths. Therefore, living in the forest is tremendously difficult.

Birds, scorpions, insects, gnats and mosquitoes always create trouble. Therefore, life in the forest is all suffering.

O lovely Sita there are thorny trees with branches on the top interlaced with one another. There are kusa grass and reeds. So forest life is very hard.

There are various physical afflictions and fears for one who lives in the forest. Therefore, forest brings suffering.

Anger and greed have to be given up, with the mind preoccupied with ascetic practices. One should not be afraid of fearful situations. Hence forest (life) always very hard.

Thus forest life is not suitable for you. On reconsideration, I see that there are many dangers in forest life.

When the great Rama decided not to take her along with him to the forest, Sita, deeply grieved said these words.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे अष्टाविंशस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the twentyeighth sarga of Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.