Lakshmana who had already reached there heard the conversation (between Sita and Rama). His eyes brimming with tears, he was unable to bear the grief. He held the feet of his brother tightly and said to the illustrious Sita and Rama of great resolveः

Lakshmana who had already reached there heard the conversation (between Sita and Rama). His eyes brimming with tears, he was unable to bear the grief. He held the feet of his brother tightly and said to the illustrious Sita and Rama of great resolveः

If you have decided to go to the forest where deer and elephants abound, I shall also accompany you by walking before you, holding the bow.

Accompanied by me, you will roam the forests echoing with the cries of birds and sounds of herds of animals.

Without you, I do not want victory over the gods or sovereignty over the worlds or even immortality.

When Rama tried to dissuade Lakshmana with many words of consolation Lakshmana who was determined to go to the forest said againः

You have granted permission to me earlier.Why are you now preventing me?

I wish to know, O sinless one, the reason why you are dissuading me, when I am willing to go with you. This creates a doubt in my mind.

Addressing the heroic Lakshmana in front of him imploring with folded hands to take him to the forest so that he may walk ahead (and guard them), the effulgent Rama saidः

You are affectionate, you are devoted to dharma. You are valiant. You always walk the path of virtue. You are dear to me like my own life. You are not only an obedient brother but also a friend.

O Lakshmana, if you also accompany me to the forest, who will take care of mother Kausalya and the illustrious Sumitra?

Dasaratha, the mighty king like Parjanya (the raingod), lord of the earth used to shower favours on earth. But now he is bound by the noose of passion.

Once the daughter of king Aswapati (Kaikeyi) gains control over the kingdom, she will do nothing to help her afflicted cowives (Kausalya and Sumitra).

When Bharata secures the kingdom, his confidence reposed in Kaikeyi he will not bother about the miserable Kausalya and Sumitra.

Either by yourself or by seeking the favour of the king, O son of Sumitra, lend support to venerable Kausalya. This is the objective you must accomplish.

If you do this, your devotion to me will be amply demonstrated. Service to the elders, O dutiful one, is a virtue, great and unequalled.

O delight of the Raghu race, do this for my sake, since deprived of us, there will be no happiness for our mother, O son of Sumitra

Thus addressed by Rama who was an adept in the use of words, eloquent Lakshmana gently repliedः

Aware of your power O valiant one, Bharata will undoubtedly pay respect to Kausalya and Sumitra with all humility.

Noble Kausalya has under her charge a thousand villages for her sustenance. She can support a thousand men like me.

Illustrious Kausalya is competent enough to support herself, my mother and men like me.

Make me your follower. There is no breach of virtue in this. I will have my purpose  accomplished. Your object also will be fulfilled.

Holding the bow and arrows and carrying a crowbar and a basket, I shall go in front of you leading the way.

I shall daily collect roots, fruits and other forest products fit for ascetics.

When you go about for pleasure on mountain slopes along with Sita, I shall do everything for you, whether you are awake or asleep.

Pleased with his words Rama said, O Lakshmana go and take leave of all your friends.

O Lakshmana in the great sacrifice performed by the highsouled Janaka, Varuna himself gave him two aweinspiring celestial bows, two impenetrable divine armours, two quivers with inexhaustible arrows, two swords plated with gold and as bright as the sun. All these weapons are deposited in the house of our preceptor (sage Vasistha) where they are being worshipped. Go and bring them swiftly.

Lakshmana, who was resolved to go to the forest, took leave of his friends, and collected from the house of Vasistha, preceptor of the Ikshvaku race, the powerful weapons deposited with him.

Lakshmana, tiger among princes, brought all those divine weapons sanctified and decorated with garlands and showed them to Rama.

O handsome Lakshmana, you have come at the expected time, said the selfpossessed Rama affectionately when he saw him arrive.

Let us give away, O tormentor of enemies (Lakshmana) my belogings to the ascetic brahmins.

Here live the best of brahmins who are deeply devoted to their teachers along with those who are dependent on me for their livelihood.

Fetch Suyajna, son of Vasistha, best among the brahmins along with all other distinguished brahmins to whom I will pay my homage and leave for the forest.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे एकत्रिंशस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the thirtyfirst sarga of Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.