When the highsouled Rama whose strength was his sense of truth set out for the forest, the faithful people followed him.

The king and the hosts of friends were forcibly sent back but they did not return. They continued to follow the chariot of Rama.

The illustrious and virtuous Rama was as dear to the inhabitants of Ayodhya as the  full Moon.

Although entreated by his subjects (not to go) Rama proceeded to the forest to make his father's vow come true.

Looking at the people with love as if they were his own children and as though  drinking them with his glances, Rama appealed to themः

O citizens of Ayodhya may the love and respect you have shown to please me be bestowed specially on Bharata

Bharata, enhancer of the delight of Kaikeyi, possesses an auspicious character. He will do for you everything appropriate, agreeable and beneficial.

Though tender in age Bharata is mature in intellect. Gentle, valiant and virtuous, he will dispel all your fears and act as a true protector.

Endowed with kingly qualities, he is recognised as heirapparent. Therefore, as I did, all of you should obey the order of the king.

If you desire to please me, act in such a way that the king does not grieve after I have gone to the forest.

The more the son of Dasaratha (Rama) committed to righteousness, the more the subjects desired that he should be their king.

Rama along with Lakshmana attracted the citydwellers who, choked with tears, were looking miserable. It appeared they were bound with his virtues.

Those brahmins who were senior (to him) on three counts like age, wisdom and spirtuality spoke to him from a distance with their heads shaking with ageः

O horses of noble breed, turn back Do not carry your master swiftyly any farther. Do good to him.

All animals, especially horses have a keen sense of hearing. Therefore, having listened to our entreaty, turn back.

Your master has a purity of heart. He is righteous, virtuous, brave and firm in resolve, carry him backward and not forward from the city into the forest.

Having seen the aged brahmins muttering pitiful lamentations in this manner, Rama immediately alighted from the chariot.

Then Rama along with Sita and Lakshmana began walking on foot with slow steps towards the forest.

Rama a man of probity and compassion could not ride off in his chariot while those brahmins were trudging far behind.

Having seen Rama thus going towards the forest, those brahmins, highly agitated and distressed, said to himः

This entire order of brahmins with the sacrificial fires on their hsoulders is following you, their wellwisher.

See these umbrellas acquired by us while performing Vajapeya sacrifice are following you like the clouds at the end of the rainy season.

You do not have a royal umbrella and you are scorched by the rays of the Sun. We will offer you shade with the umbrellas acquired during Vajapeya sacrifice.

O dear child, our minds always pursue the study of vedic hymns. For your sake now they are made to follow the life in the forest.

The Vedas are our greatest wealth and they reside in our hearts. Our wives, protected by their fidelity, shall stay at home.

We are not going to revoke our decision. We have made up our minds to follow you (into the forest). If you have no regard for this decision, then who will adhere to the path of righteousness?

O Rama, you are firm in your duty.We beseech you, our heads bowed with swanwhite hair and soiled with dust, to return to Ayodhya.

Many of those brahmins who arrived here have commenced their sacrifices. O dear child, their consummation depends on your return.

O Rama, all these living beings, movable and immovable, are devoted to you and are entreating you with devotion to return. Show consideration to those supplicants.

Although the trees uplifted by the speed of the wind, intend to follow you, their movement is stalled by their roots. Unable, they appear to be weeping.

Even the birds instead of foraging for food are sitting motionless on the trees at one place. They are imploring you, you who are compassionate to all creatures, to return to Ayodhya.

While those brahmins were thus crying out, river Tamasa came into view as if seeking Rama to turn back to Ayodhya.

Then Sumantra also unyoked the fatigued horses from the chariot and quickly allowed them to roll and relax on the ground. Having made the horses drink and dip  in water, he released them for grazing not far from Tamasa river.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे पञ्चचत्वारिंशस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the fortyfifth sarga of Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.