After spending the night, the princes, destroyers of enemies, offered obeisance to that  great sage (Bharadhwaja) and went towards that mount Chitrkuta.

Seeing them setting forth, the great sage blessed them for a safe journey and followed them like a father following his children.

Then that great effulgent sage Bharadwaja began to speak to Rama whose strength was truth.

Reaching the confluence of rivers Ganga and Yamuna, O Rama and Lakshmana best among men proceed along the Kalindi (Yamuna) river flowing westward.

On reaching that swiftflowing river Yamuna, O Rama and Lakshmana O scions of the Raghu race, you will find an ancient spot (on the river bank). There make a raft and cross Kalindi, daughter of the Sun.

There you will find a large, banyan tree with its lush green leaves, looking dark with its densely grown trees. It is inhabited by siddhas. Sita should offer with folded palms invocations for her wellbeing.

Reaching that tree, you may tarry or proceed further. A krosa from there, you will see a beautiful forest filled with dark trees mixed with Palasas and badaris and bamboos on the Yamuna.

That path leads to Chitrakuta. I had travelled through it several times. It is beautiful, smooth and safe from forest fires.

The great sage returned after instructing Rama about the path. So be it, said Rama and offering obeisance requested Bharadhwaja to go back.

With the sage gone, Rama said, O Saumitri (son of Sumitra) we are lucky, for the sage has been so kind.

Thus talking with one another, the two nobleminded tigers (best) among men advanced towards river Kalindi (Yamuna) with Sita walking in front.

Thereafter, they all reached the rapidly flowing river Kalindi and began pondering how to cross it.

Then they both made a big wooden float by joining logs of wood, spreading bamboos on it and covering it with the (fragrant roots of) Ushira bushes.

The valiant Lakshmana cut the stems of reeds and branches of the Jambu tree to prepare a comfortable seat for Sita (on that float).

Rama, son of Dasaratha helped his beloved (Sita), who was looking inconceivably like Lakshmi (goddess of wealth) and was feeling a little bashful while stepping on to the float.

Rama placed robes and ornaments on the float by the side of Sita and a spade and a basket along with weapons.

Those valiant sons of Dasaratha held the float (firmly) to help Sita step on to it. Then they crossed the river carefully.

On reaching the middle of the river Yamuna, Sita made reverential salutations to her saying O goddess, I am crossing you, may safety be ours and may my husband fulfil his vow After Rama's (safe) return to the city (of Ayodhya) ruled by the Ikshvaku kings, I shall worship you with a thousand cows and a hundred pots of wine.

While Sita with her fair complexion was thus invoking river Yamuna with folded hands they reached the southern bank.

They crossed the swiftflowing river Yamuna, daughter of the Sungod, full of waves and with trees growing thick on her banks.

Having crossed the river, they left the float and proceeded from the adjoining forest of Yamuna and reached the dark, cool banyan tree covered with lush green leaves.

Having reached the banyan tree, Sita invoked it, saying, 'O great tree I offer you my salutations. May my husband fulfil his vow May I behold Kausalya and the illustrious Sumitra on my return. Saying so, she went round the tree offering reverential salutations with folded hands.

Beholding the obedient, blemishless, beloved Sita invoking blessings, Rama said to Lakhsmanaः

O Lakshmana, best among bipeds (men) and brother of Bharata walk ahead with Sita and I shall follow with weapons.

Whatever fruit or flower the daughter of Janaka asks for, get it. Whatever pleases her mind give it.

The daughter of Janaka walked between them like a sheelephant between two males.

That gentle lady enquired of Rama about a tree or a shrub or a creeper in full bloom which she did not see before.

Cheered by Sita's indents, Lakshmana brought her various beautiful plants and stocks of flowers.

Beholding the river Yamuna with its wonderful water and sand echoing with the cackle of swans and cranes, Sita went ecstatic.

After walking a krosa into the forest on the bank of Yamuna, the two brothers killed many deer suitable for sacrifice and ate them.

They reached the tableland on the bank of that river and moved in high spirit in the lovely forest resounding with cries of flocks of peacocks and teeming with monkeys and elephants. Finally they selected a spot for their stay.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे पञ्चपञ्चाशस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the fiftyfifth sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.