When the night was over, Rama, Delight of the Raghus, gently awakened Lakshmana who was asleep.

Listen to the songs of the forest birds, O son of Sumitra O tormentor of foes it is time we set out.

Awakened by his brother in time, Lakshmana shook off his sleep, his drowsiness and his fatigue due to journey.

Then they all rose, touched the river's auspicious waters and went the way the sage had directed -- towards mount Chitrakuta.

Early in the morning Rama set out with Lakshmana and said this to Sita with eyes like lotus petalsः

O daughter of Videha behold these kimsuka trees in full bloom everywhere. With the passing of winter, they appear bright as though they are garlanded by their own flowers.

Behold these bhallataka trees in full bloom though there are none to enjoy them. They are bent with fruits and leaves. Surely, we can live here. (This place is fit for our habitation).

O Lakshmana see the honeycombs of the size of wooden vessels crowded by the honeybees hanging down from every tree.

In this delightful forest region strewn with fallen flowers the peacock is responding to the screaming of natyuha bird.

See these flocks of singing birds followed by herds of elephants. See this mount Chitrakuta with its towering peaks.

O dear this sacred forest of Chitrakuta standing on a level land is full of various trees. Let us enjoy it.

Then they both along with Sita walked to that lovely, delightful Chitrakuta mountain.

Rama arrived at that enchanting mountain full of various kinds of birds, fruits and roots, and sweet water. (And said to Lakshmanaः)

O gentle one this enchanting mountain with different kinds of trees and creepers and many roots and fruits appears to be a happy place to live in.

Great sages reside on this high mountain. Let it be our habitation and let us enjoy our life here, O handsome one

Thus Rama, Sita and Lakshmana approached the hermitage of sage Valmiki and paid obeisance to him with folded hands.

The great sage Valmiki conversant with righteousness was delighted. He honoured them by extending welcome and said 'Be seated'.

The mightyarmed elder brother of Lakshmana revealed his identity to the sage by duly introducing himself. And said then to Lakshmanaः

O handsome Lakshmana, make a hut with strong, sound logs of wood. My mind impels me to stay here.

Having heard Rama, Saumitri, the subduer of enemies fetched different kinds of logs of wood, and with them made a hut and thatched it with leaves.

Rama saw the goodlooking leafhut with mats tied around as walls, and said to Lakshmana who was awaiting further command with rapt attentionः

O Lakshmana those who intend to live for long (in this hut), should pacify the deity presiding over here. Therefore, we shall bring the venison of a black antelope and make necessary offerings.

Slay an antelope and bring it here quickly. O Lakshmana The rites as prescribed by the scriptures will have to be carried out. You may recollect that tradition.

Lakshmana, slayer of heroes on the enemy's side, understood and implemented what he was told. Rama again said to himः

Cook this venison, O handsome one We will offer it to the presiding deity of this hut. Hasten, the day and time are fixed (for the rites)

Then the powerful son of Sumitra killed a black antelope fit for offering, and offered it to the wellkindled fire.

With the blood drained out of the venison, Lakshmana roasted it and cooked it well, and then said to Rama, the tiger (best) among men.

This black antelope with all its limbs is wellcooked. O divine sire, you may make the  offering to Vastu devata in which you are proficient.

Virtuous Rama, who was an expert in the recitation of mantras, took his bath and his mind controlled, intoned briefly all the mantras appropriate to the completion of the ritual.

Sanctified with the worship of all the gods, Rama of immeasurable lustre felt a great happiness on entering the hut.

Rama, offered oblations to Visvadevas, Rudra and Visnu, performed the auspices for the appeasement of the household deity. And having muttered japa silently in conformity with tradition, he took his ablution in the river as enjoined (by the sastras) and offered his final oblations for the expiation of his sins.

Rama, son of the Raghus, made altars in all the quarters, places of worship and sacred spots for fire befitting a hermitage.

Bestowed with auspicious qualities, Rama and Lakshmana along with Sita propitiated those celestial beings with garlands of forest flowers, fruits and roots, wellcooked venison, water, muttering of prayers as expounded in the Vedas, faggots and kusa grass and entered that auspicious hermitage.

Just like the gods enter the court of Sudharma, they all stepped into the hut to dwell there. The hut was charming wellbuilt on a suitable site and protected against storm.

Then they with their senses conquered, enjoyed perfect happiness in that splendid forest teeming with many varieties of animals and birds, with trees full of brilliant clusters of flowers and echoing with the sounds of wild animals.

Having reached the marvellous mount Chitrakuta and river Malyavati with excellent holy places and full of animals and birds, Rama shed the sorrow of his banishment from the city (of Ayodhya) and rejoiced with a gladdened heart.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे षट्पञ्चाशस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the fiftysixth sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.