Thereafter Kausalya, trembling as if possessed by an evil spirit and rolling on the floor like one who her senses now and again, said to the charioteer (Sumantra)ः

Take me where Rama, Sita and Lakshmana are. I do not wish to live even for a moment without them.

'Turn back your chariot immediately and take me to the Dandaka forest. If I do not follow them, I shall enter the world of Yama'.

With folded hands and faltering words choked by his fastflowing tears the charioteer tried to console Kausalyaः

Abandon your tears, delusion and despair arising out of sorrow. Rama is going to live  in the forest, brushing aside all agony.

Selfcontrolled Lakshmana, aware of his duty, serves Rama in the forest. By this he is securing his next world.

Sita with her mind fixed on Rama is living confidently in that desolate forest without any fear as if it were her home.

I could not see even the slightest depression in Sita as if she was accustomed to staying away from home.

Earlier, just as Sita used to revel in the gardens of the city, so does she now in those desolate forests.

Charming Sita whose face resembles the full Moon, with her mind fixed on Rama, is enjoying even the desolate forest like a child.

Her heart is ever united with Rama, and her life is under his control. Without Rama, even Ayodhya would become a forest for her.

Seeing villages, cities, trees of different kinds and courses of rivers, Sita is enquiring  from Rama or Lakshmana about them. She feels as though she is sporting in the pleasuregarden just a krosa from Ayodhya.

Sita did say something about Kaikeyi, but now I do not remember what.

Diverting the context of what he uttered inadvertently relating to Kaikeyi, the charioteer said pleasing words of consolation to Kausalya.

Just like the beams of the Moon, Sita's glow is not affected by the fatigue of the journey or by the speed of the wind or by the scorching heat.

The countenance of Sita with her gentle eloquence resembles a hundredpetalled lotus. She has the luminance of the full Moon that has not wilted.

Her feet, now devoid of lacdye, still look red like lac and shine like the lotus bud.

Casting off her ornaments, the damsel (Sita) is gracefully walking as if dalliant with her tinkling anklets for her love for him (Rama).

Though in the forest, Sita, under the protection of Rama's arms, is afraid of neither elephants nor lions nor tigers.

You need not lament for them or for yourself or for the king. This story of Rama will endure permanently in the world.

They are upholding the sacred promise of their father with cheerful hearts, grief given the goby, steadfastly pursuing the path established by maharsis, subsisting on forest fruits and enjoying the forest life.

Though Sumantra was speaking with befitting words to prevent Kausalya from weeping over her son which had enfeebled her, she did not stop crying, 'O my beloved', 'O my son', 'O Rama'.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे षष्टितमस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the sixtieth sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.