Forced to hear the harsh words of angry Kausalya, the king, deeply distressed, was absorbed in sad thought.

The king (Dasaratha) tormentor of enemies, for a while, lost his consciousness, his senses bewildered. After a long time he regained his senses.

When he regained his senses, the king heaved deep, hot sighs. Seeing Kausalya by his side he relapsed into a state of anxiety.

While he was thus reflecting on a sinful act he had inadvertently comitted long ago, the act of discharging an arrow that could hit its target following the sound, flashed in his mind.

The great king, the lord with a broken heart started regretting deeply about both the grievous acts he had committed previously (one is shooting at the son of a sage and the other, banishing Rama).

Consumed by the double sorrow, the king trembling, with head down and folding his hands said to Kausalya in order to appease herः

O Kausalya I entreat you with folded palms. Be merciful. Forever affectionate, you are not cruel even towards your enemies.

O Devi for women who have regard for righteousness, a husband, whether virtuous or not, is a god incarnate.

You always adhere to righteousness. You have seen both the extremes (good and bad) of this world. Athough you yourself are in grief it does not behove you to speak unpleasant words to one who is suffering from a greater grief.

Kausalya heard the pitiable words uttered by the king who was in a wretched condition. She shed tears like a water channel discharging fresh rainwater.

Frightened Kausalya, weeping and raising her palms folded like lotus on to her head, and charged with emotions said with stumbling syllablesः

O lord, by falling on the ground at your feet, bowing my head I beg of you to be pleased. By your act of beseeching me, I have been badly hurt. I do deserve to be pardoned.

O heroic one a woman, who is entreated by her sagacious and praiseworthy husband, loses both the worlds.

O righteous one I know the path of dharma. I also know that you are a truthful. Afflicted with grief on account of my son, I spoke somewhat harshly.

Grief destroys fortitude. Grief destroys knowledge of the scriptures, grief destroys everything. There is no enemy equal to grief.

One can endure an unexpected blow from the enemy's hand but to endure unexpected grief, however slight it may be, is impossible.

O heroic one even learned ascetics who are well versed in ethics and scriptures and who are free from doubts with regard to dharma and artha, are deluded by grief.

This is the fifth night of Rama's exile, but it is like five years to me whose joy has been destroyed by sorrow.

As I think of Rama, my heart swells with sorrow just as the ocean rises with rushing rivers.

While Kausalya was speaking these hearttouching words, the rays of the Sun began to fade and the night fell.

Thus consoled by Kausalya the king, overcome with grief, came under the spell of sleep.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे द्विषष्टितमस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the sixtysecond sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.