Grieving for having unfairly killed the great sage the rightenous descendant of the Raghus (Dasaratha) coutinued to tell Kausalya about itः

Having committed the sin unwittingly, I was greatly agitated. I reflected in my mind as  to how to atone for this great sin.

Holding the pot filled with clean water I reached the hermitage following the path as directed.

There I found his weak, blind, old parents. With no supporter, they looked like birds with clipped wings. They sat there helplessly like orphans and passively talking about their son, their only hope that I have deprived them of.

Smitten with grief and my heart throbbing with fear I reached the hermitage and my sorrow became manifold.

Hearing the sound of my footsteps, the sage said 'O son why have you delayed? Bring me some water quickly'.

'O Dear child, whatever be the reason, you have been sporting in the water so long, come at once to the hermitage. Your mother is anxious.

'O Child, O Son if your mother or I have done anything disagreeable, do not take it to heart, for you are an ascetic.

'You are a support to the supportless, eyes to the blind, you are our very vital life. Why don't you speak to us'?

As I saw him, my heart was filled with terror and I stammered as I spoke in garbled sentences.

After a lot of effort, with great fear controlling my thoughts and the power of speech, I related to him the calamity that had befallen his son.

O magnanimous sage I am a kshatriya known as Dasaratha. I am not your son. A pathetic incident has been caused by my own action, condemnable by the virtuous.

Wishing to hunt a wild elephant coming down to the water hole for drinking, I went to the bank of Sarayu, bow in hand, O revered sage

There I heard the sound of a pot being filled with water and mistaking it to be an elephant's, shot an arrow.

Thereafter I reached the river bank and beheld an ascetic with an arrow pierced in his chest. He was lying on the ground, his life ebbing away.

O venerable one I released an arrow towards the water aiming at the sound intending to kill an elephant but it hit your son.

Then I approached him. He was suffering from excruciating pain. I pulled out at his word the arrow from his chest.

Grieving for both of you and crying you are blind he died as soon as the arrow was pulled out.

Your son has been killed by me due to my ignorance. Since this has happened, may the ascetic be pleased to command me on the next course of action.

The venerable sage heard my cruel words about the sinful act and was not able to seriously react. (He was stunned).

The griefstricken, glorious ascetic with his face filled with tears, heaving deep sighs broke down with grief and spoke to me as I was standing with folded palms.

'O king, hadn't you yourself broken this inauspicious news, your head would have split into a hundred thousand pieces right now.

'If a kshatriya kills any one knowingly, particularly when in vanaprastha (third stage) this sin can displace even Indra, wielder of the thunderbolt from his position, O king.

'If any one deliberately discharges a weapon upon an ascetic observing austerities or on him who expounds the Vedas, his head will split into seven pieces.

'Since you have done this unwittingly you are still alive. If it had been otherwise, your Ikshvaku race itself would have been exterminated, what to speak of you

'O king take us to that place. We wish to have the last look at him, at his garment of antelope skin in disarray, his body spattered with blood, lying on the ground unconscious under the sway of the lord of death'. Thus the sage said to me.

Thereupon, I took both of them all by myself to that spot and made the grieving  ascetics touch the body of their son.

Both the ascetics stroking their son's body and collapsed upon it. And the father saidः

'O child why are you not greeting us today nor speaking? Why are you lying on the ground? Are you angry with us?

'O righteous son if I am no longer dear to you, (at least) look at your mother. O tender child, why are you not embracing me? Speak.

'From whom shall I hear the sweet recitation of scriptures or other texts, delightful to my heart in the last watch of the night?

'O son I am tortured with sorrow and fear. Who will serve me from now on after the ablution and the morning worship of Sandhya, followed by oblations to the sacrificial fire?

'I am incapable of doing any work, I am unable to procure anything (to meet my needs. now). I have no guide (to help me walk my way). Who will feed me like a welcome guest with tubers and fruits?

'O son how can I support your wretched and pitiable mother, who is blind, old and yearning for her son?

'My dear son, stay with me, do not go (now) to the abode of Yama, (lord of death). Tomorrow accompanied by me and your mother you may

'Deserted by you and without any support in the forest, afflicted with grief and feeling miserable, both of us also will assuredly go to Yama's abode, quickly.

'There seeing Yama, (lord of death), I shall say O Lord of Justice forgive me. Let this boy continue to maintain his parents.

'That lord of justice, who is highly renowned, righteous and the guardian of the worlds will grant me one unfailing boon of protection from fear.

'O sinless son, you are killed by a person of sinful deeds. On this truth, quickly go to those worlds which are attained by those valiant heroes.



'You will attain, my son, the same supreme state achieved by Sagara, Saibya, Dilipa, Janamejaya, Nahusha and Dundumara.

'You, my son, shall attain that supreme state obtained by those who are virtuous, who study the Vedas and practise asceticism.You shall attain the state merited by those bestowers of land as charity, who kindle the sacred fires, who are monoganists, who offer a thousand cows in charity, who nurture the venerable and who willingly lay down their bodies.

'He who has killed you will alone attain that undesirable state, a member of our family will not.'

In this way the ascetic piteously wailed again and again. Thereafter, he with his wife set about to perform the funeral obsequies of their son.

The virtuous son of that ascetic assumed a celestial form through the merit of his good deeds and ascended heaven at once with Indra.

The ascetic in the company of Indra consoling the aged couple for a brief moment saidः

'I have attained this supreme state by virtue of the service rendered to you. You will also attain my state soon.'

The sage's son with his senses under control said this while ascending heaven on a beautiful, celestial, aerial chariot.

The radiant ascetic along with his wife hurriedly completed the funeral libations and said to me standing with folded palmsः

'Kill me, O king with the same arrow by which you rendered me childless. Death holds no pain for me.

'Though you have killed my purehearted son unintentionally, I will pronounce a disastrous and dreadful curse on you.

'Just as I am now suffering from grief caused by my son's death, you, O king, shall die from the sorrow on account of (separation from) your son.

'Since you, O lord of men, you have killed an ascetic unaware, as kshatriya the sin of slaying a brahmin will not accrue to you immediately.

'Just like the merits of alms come to the giver, you are going to face very soon a dreadful situation causing the end of your life.'

Having thus cursed me, the couple piteously lamenting for a long time, laid themselves down on the funeral pyre and went to heaven.

While reflecting about it now, O Devi (Kausalya) I recollect this sin committed by me unintentionally, with childish pranks while practising the art of hitting a target by its sound.

Just as a man eating forbidden food and drink falls sick, so have I fallen prey to grief,  because of my sin, O Devi

O gentle lady, the words of that noble ascetic have come true today. Hence I am now going to give up my life.

O Kausalya, I cannot see you with my eyes. Touch me gently, said the frightened Dasaratha, Lord of the earth, to his wife weeping.

Whatever I have done to the scion of the Raghu family (Rama) is befitting me, O Devi. And whatever he has done in respect of me is also worthy of him.

Which clearsighted man in this world, will abandon his son even if he is of evil conduct? Which son will not get angry with his father when he is banished?

Before I die, will Rama touch me once or will he come to me? After reaching the abode of Yama men cannot see their relations.

O Kausalya, I am unable to see you. My memory is failing and the messengers of Yama are hastening me.

Can there be a greater sorrow than that at the last moment of my life I am unable to  see my righteous and truthful son, Rama?

My grief in the absence of Rama of peerless deeds is drying up my life as heat dries up small pools of water.

Those who will behold Rama's countenance adorned with auspicious earrings on his return in the fifteenth year are gods not men.

Blessed are they who will behold Rama's countenance resembling the Moon, lord of the stars with eyes like lotus petals graceful eyebrows, even teeth and a nose.

Fortunate indeed are the men who will behold my son's fragrant countenance camparable to the autmnal Moon and the fullblown lotus.

Lucky men will behold Rama return to Ayodhya after the completion of his exile, like the planet Venus moving forward on its orbit.

O Kausalya, my heart, it appears is sinking and on account of delusion I am not able to feel the sense objects like sound touch and taste together.

With the loss of my mental faculty, all the sense organs are giving way, like the rays of the lamp giving way together when the oil is exhausted.

This selfcreated grief is rapidly destroying me like the bank of a river eroded by its swift current, leaving me helpless and insensible.

Ah, mightyarmed Rama, destroyer of my agonies, Ah, the delight of your father, Ah, my protector, Ah, my son, where have you gone?.

Ah, Kausalya, Ah, pitiable Sumitra, Ah, cruel Kaikeyi, my enemy and defiler of my race, I am going to die.

King Dasaratha, thus crying in distress in the presence of Rama's mother and Sumitra reached the end of his life.

King Dasaratha, a man of noble vision and lord of men, anguished by the exile of his son, kept pitiably muttering till past midnight until tormented by an intense agony he breathed his last.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे चतुष्षष्टितमस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the sixtyfourth sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.