Having listened to their (the counsellors') words, Vasistha replied to the host of friends and counsellors of the king and to all the brahminsः

Bharata on whom the kingdom has been conferred is living comfortably in his maternal uncle's house. Let swift messengers go quickly on speeding horses and bring back the valiant brothers, Bharata and Satrughna. What is there to deliberate for us in this matter?

Let the messengers go, said all of them to Vasistha. On hearing this, Vasistha replied again.

Calling Siddhartha, Vijaya, Jayanta, Asoka and Nandana, Vasistha said, All of you listen to what is required to be done (by you).

Go at once from here on swift horses to the city of Rajagrha and concealing signs of grief, convey these words to Bharata as my commandः

The family priest and all the counsellors wish your welfare. You must return in haste. There is an urgent task required to be done by you.

All of you go there and do not communicate (to Bharata) about the exile of Rama or the demise of his father and the disaster that has befallen the Raghus.

Take with you silk garments and precious ornaments for the king of Kekaya and Bharata and depart at once.

The messengers set to depart to Kekaya kingdom, carrying with them the necessaries  for their journey went to their respective homes mounted on excellent horses.

Having completed the rest of the arrangements for the journey and permitted by Vasistha, the messengers left.

The messengers proceeded in westerly direction for some distance and then crossed the southern end of the Aparatala mountain. Thereafter, they travelled northward along the bank of Malini that flows in between Aparatala and Pralamba mountains.

The messengers crossed Ganga at Hastinapura, and went in the westerly direction through the middle of Kurujangala and reached the country of Panchala. Beholding lakes full of water and rivers of pellucid waters there, they travelled fast with a view to fulfilling their mission.

The messengers crossed the divine Saradanda of calm waters frequented by fowls of various speices and thronged with people. And proceeded speedily.

They reached a divine tree (of great powers) known as Satyopayachana tree and having gone round and paid homage they entered the Kulinga city.

From there they reached a village known as Abhikala and crossed the sacred Ikshumati flowing from Bodhibhavana mountain. This region was enjoyed by fathers and forefathers of Dasaratha.

There they saw the brahmins versed in the Vedas and drank water with cupped palms. Then they continued their journey through the middle of Bahlika country, and reached Sudama mountain.

Beholding the footprints of Visnu (on Sudama mountain), and seeing Vipasa, and Salmali rivers, trees, streams, deep wells, ponds, pools, large tanks, different kinds of  lions, tigers and elephants, they travelled a long distance with the intention of fulfilling the command of their master.

After a prolonged journey the messengers with their tired horses soon reached Girivraja, the (capital city of Kekaya kingdom) best of cities.

To please their master (sage Vasistha) and to preserve the royal dynasty and also to protect the honour of the (race and people), the messengers soon reached their destination by night without any negligence of their duty.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे अष्टषष्टितमस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the sixtyeighth sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.