﻿﻿  Glorious and prosperous prince Bharata, the delight of the Ikshvaku race, set out from Rajagriha, took the eastern direction, and observing the course of the river Sudama crossed Hladini and Satadru rivers which were very wide and flowing westwards crested with waves.

﻿﻿  Glorious and prosperous prince Bharata, the delight of the Ikshvaku race, set out from Rajagriha, took the eastern direction, and observing the course of the river Sudama crossed Hladini and Satadru rivers which were very wide and flowing westwards crested with waves.

﻿﻿  Bharata, ever true to his word, handsome and purehearted, reached Aparaparpata region and crossed river Satadru at Eladhana, the mountain in which river Silavaha originates. Then he traversed Salyakarsna regions in the northeast, observing the course of the Silavaha and went beyond the great mountains in the direction of the forest called Chaitraratha.

﻿  Arriving at the confluence of Saraswati and Ganga and traversing the north of Veeramatsya region, he entered the Bharunda forest.

﻿  He crossed the swiftflowing river known as Kulinga surrounded by hills and pleasing to the mind. Thereafter on crossing Yamuna he made his army rest on the otherside.

﻿  The weary horses rested and cooled their bodies. And they bathed and drank. They set out again refreshed taking with them a store of water.

﻿  Then with the blessed prince (Bharata) on an excellent chariot, it (the army) moved through the vast and uninhabited forest like the god of wind passing through the sky.

﻿  Bharata, the descendant of Raghu, knowing that the mighty river Bhagirathi was difficult to cross at a place known as Anshudhana, quickly reached the famous city of Pragvata.

﻿  With Ganga at Pragvata city and river Kutikoshtika crossed along with his army, he reached Dharmavardhana village.

﻿  Having traversed the southern end of Torana, the son of Dasaratha (Bharata) reached the beautiful Varutha village via Jambuprastha.

﻿  He (Bharata) halted in that charming forest for a while, proceeded eastwards till he reached a place known as Ujjihana garden abounding in spriyaka trees.

﻿  After reaching the groves of sala and priyaka trees, Bharata harnessed the swiftrunning horses to the chariot and ordered his forces to proceed fast.

﻿  That tiger among men, Bharata halted at a place known as Sarvatirtha and crossed the Uttanika and various other rivers with the help of hillborn horses. He crossed the Kutika river on an elephant the river Kapivati at a place known as Lauhitya.

﻿  Bharata crossed the rivers Sthanumati at Ekasala and Gomati at Vinata villages. Thereafter as his horses were extremely tired he rested for a while in the sala forest in Kalinganagara before he speedily set out (again).

﻿  He passed quickly through the forest at night and at sunrise beheld the city of Ayodhya built by king Manu.

﻿  Having spent seven nights on his way, that tiger among men (Bharata) saw Ayodhaya before him. He said to the charioteerः

﻿  O charioteer I am able to see Ayodhya of great renown from a distance but not so clearly that whiteclaycity of Ayodhya, with its sacred gardens ruled by several rajarsis, inhabited by numerous wealthy people, by virtuous brahmins and priests who perform sacrifices and who are wellversed in the Vedas.

﻿﻿﻿  O charioteer I am able to see Ayodhya of great renown from a distance but not so clearly that whiteclaycity of Ayodhya, with its sacred gardens ruled by several rajarsis, inhabited by numerous wealthy people, by virtuous brahmins and priests who perform sacrifices and who are wellversed in the Vedas.

﻿  I do not hear now, in Ayodhya the tumultous noise of men and women I used to hear earlier all over.

﻿  I do not see people who with passion used to stroll in the parks early in the morning. I see no cheerfulness in any one.

﻿  O charioteer, people full of passion have abandoned the gardens. To me, the city looks like a forest as if weeping.

﻿﻿  Important people mounted on elephants or horses are not seen going out of the city or coming in.

﻿  Earlier the gardens used to reverberate with passionate songs of birds--places appropriate for lovers seeking pleasures.

﻿﻿  Now the trees appear cheerless, the paths are full of dry leaves fallen all over. It appears as if the trees are crying.

﻿﻿  I do not hear in the red tincture of the rising Sun the melodious voices of the freely moving animals and birds.

﻿  Why is it that the incomparable fragrance of sandal and incense that used to fill the nostrils, not blowing now in the prosperous city of Ayodhya?

﻿﻿  Why is it that the sounds of musical instruments like mrudangas and veenas are not heard now? Why is the city filled with melancholy?

﻿  Since I see many passing, inauspicious, sinful, ugly sights, my mind shrinks.

﻿  I do not see anywhere, O charioteer the wellbeing, of my kinsmen. Hence I feel deluded and my heart is filled with grief.

﻿  Dejected and depressed at heart, with no control over his senses and his mind full of apprehension, Bharata swiftly entered the city of Ayodhya ruled by the Ikshvakus.

﻿  He entered the city through the gate known as Vaijayanta with his horses exhausted. The doorkeepers stood up and amidst cries of victory followed him in.

﻿  Bewildered, that descendant of Raghu (Bharata), reciprocated the greetings of the gatekeepers and then addressed the exhausted charioteer, Ashwapatiः

﻿  O irreproachable one, why was I brought here in haste without any reason? My mind apprehends something inauspicious. I feel indisposed.

﻿  O charioteer I now see the very for ebodings I had heard in the past in connection with the death of kings.

﻿﻿  I see the unswept homes of householders standing dirty with doors not closed. There is no beauty anywhere. No one offers oblations (at the time of worship). There is no fragrance of burning incense. The families have no food to eat. The people look cheerless. I see inauspiciousness everywhere.

﻿  I see the unswept homes of householders standing dirty with doors not closed. There is no beauty anywhere. No one offers oblations (at the time of worship). There is no fragrance of burning incense. The families have no food to eat. The people look cheerless. I see inauspiciousness everywhere.

﻿  The temples stand devoid of the beauty of floral offerings. The floors of front yards are left unswept and unsmeared. They look deserted, devoid of brightness of the past.

﻿  The offerings to deities have been dispensed with. There are no groups of people performing the usual holy sacrifices. The markets where garlands were sold now stand without them.

﻿  Even traders seem restrained by the loss of business. They are not seen as before concentrating on their trade.

﻿  I see groups of birds frequenting the temples. The sanctuaries appear dispirited. The people in the city, both men and women look dull, emaciated, pitiable with throats choked. Their eyes are filled with tears and minds absorbed in distressing thoughts.

﻿  With these words said to the charioteer, Bharata, having seen such ominous sights in Ayodhya, proceeded to the king's palace with a depressed heart.

﻿  As he (Bharata) beheld the city of Ayodhya that once had the lustre of the city of Indra, now with its crossroads, houses and highways all deserted, the fittings (nuts and bolts) on the doors red with dust, he was overwhelmed with grief.

﻿  Having witnessed many unpleasant things that had never happened before, the magnanimous Bharata who was looking cheerless and dejected entered his father's palace with his head bent down.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे एकसप्ततितमस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the seventyfirst sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.