Then, at the hour of dawn on the fourteenth day, all those who were empowered to proclaim the king, assembled and addressed Bharataः

Dasaratha, who was our most revered master and preceptor, having exiled his eldest son Rama and mighty Lakshmana, ascended heaven.

O illutrious prince do assume kingship now. Incidentally, there has been yet no attack on this leaderless kingdom.

O prince of the Raghu race (Bharata), your subjects and guilds of traders, artisans, etc, have procured necessary materials for your consecration, and await you.

O best among men, inherit this stable kingdom of your ancestors, get yourself consecrated and save us.

Bharata, firm in vows, circumambulated all the articles procured in connection with  consecration, and replied them as followsः

It has been the tradition in our race that the eldest son alone should always inherit the kingdom. It does not behove intelligent people like you to tell me like this.

Our eldest brother, Rama shall become king. As for me, I shall dwell in the forest for fourteen years.

Let the great and powerful army of four divisions be marshalled. I will bring back my eldest brother Rama from the forest.

I shall go to the forest to (bring back) Rama, with all these articles, procured for coronation kept in front.

After coronating Rama, the best of men, there itself, I will definitely bring him back, letting him go ahead of me, like the sacred fire carried from the place of sacrifice.

I shall never fulfil the wishes of that woman called my mother. I shall dwell in the inaccessible forest and Rama shall become king.

Let the road be aligned by artisans and uneven ground be levelled. The guards who judge the inaccessible terrains should follow them on their way.

When prince Bharata was thus speaking in favour of Rama, all the people responded with these excellent, propitious wordsः

May Lakshmi, goddess of prosperity, abide in you for having expressed your desire to bestow the kingdom upon the king's eldest son.

With such graceful words spoken by the prince within their hearing, tears of joy filled the eyes of the noble people and fell drop by drop down their faces.

All the ministers and members of the council, relieved of their distress, were delighted to hear these words and said O best among men, on your orders devoted people and groups of artisans have been instructed to lay the road.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे एकोनाशीतितमस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the seventyninth sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.