When thus spoken to, Bharata, a great intellectual, replied to Guha with these well thought out and meaningful words.

O dear friend of my elder brother, your desire to extend hospitality to this large army all alone is indeed noble.

Having spoken to Guha courteously, the majestic, radiant Bharata continuedः

O Guha this region of Ganga with its dense forest is very difficult to cross. How can I reach the hermitage of Bharadwaja?

When he heard those words of the sagacious Bharata, Guha the forest ranger answered him reverentially with folded palms.

O prince of great renown I shall follow you, wellprepared with these fishermen, armed with bows.

Are you not going to that place with the evil intention of causing harm to Rama of unwearied actions? This large army of yours arouses doubts in me.

When he heard Guha thus speaking, Bharata who was as tranquil as the sky, said to him in a gentle voice.

That calmitous time will never come (again). You should not suspect me. I look upon Rama, my eldest brother, as my father.

I am going to bring back that scion of the kakutsthas (Rama) who resides in the forest. O Guha, do not entertain any other thought. I am tellng you the truth.

When he heard those words of Bharata, Guha was delighted and his face beamed with joy as he said to Bharataः

Blessed indeed you are as you desire to renounce the kingdom that has come to you effortlessly. I see none equal to you on this earth.

You desire to bring back Rama who is in great difficulty. This everlasting fame of yours will spread all over the world.

As Guha was thus conversing with Bharata, the rays of the Sun diminished and the night set in.

Fortunate Bharata gratified by Guha encamped his army and retired to bed along with Satrughna.

But the thought of Rama caused grief to the magnanimous Bharata, a man of righteous outlook who did not deserve such grief.

Just like a concealed forestfire scorching the dried up forest, the fire of sorrow kindled in his mind scorched Bharata.

Like the ice melted by the heat of the Sun's rays flows down the Himalayas, sweat poured from all parts of his body caused by the fire of grief.

Bharata, son of Kaikeyi was stricken by a lofty mountain of grief. The cavityless rocks of that mountain were his contemplation, the minerals were his sighs, the multitude of trees were his desolation, peaks were his fatigue and mental distress, the unlimited number of animals were his stupor, the bamboo tree was his sorrow.

Then best of men, Bharata, with highly distraught mind and heaving sighs, with senses bewildered and oppressed by the fever raging in his heart and caught in a great calamity, like a bull separated from the herd enjoyed no peace of mind.

Bharata, a man of great magnanimity, joined Guha together with his people with composed mind. Then Guha, greatly distraught, again consoled Bharata regarding his elder brother Rama.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे पञ्चाशीतितमस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the eightyfifth sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.