Rama, resembling the gods, who had been living there for long developed a liking for the mountains and forests. With a desire to please Sita and his own mind, he showed her the wonderful Chitrakuta mountain as Indra did to his wife Sachi.

Rama, resembling the gods, who had been living there for long developed a liking for the mountains and forests. With a desire to please Sita and his own mind, he showed her the wonderful Chitrakuta mountain as Indra did to his wife Sachi.

O gentle one, when I behold this lovely mountain, neither the expulsion from the kingdom nor being away from friends pains my mind.

O auspicious one, you may behold this mountin abounding in flocks of birds of every kind and its peaks adorned wtih minerals and as if piercing the sky.

This mountain with its peaks is adorned with various minerals. Some of the regions have the radiance of silver and bronze, some look bloodred or maddercrimson, some sparkle like the rarest of gems while others shine like topaz or crystal or a flower of ketaka plant or shimmer like stars and quicksilver.

This mount Chitrakuta is swarmed by flocks of birds and herds of several kinds of animals like tigers, panthers and bears of every kind giving up their cruel nature.

This mountain is spread over with various kinds of flowering trees and trees laden with fruits, shady and enchanting, mango, roseapples, asanas, lodhras, priyalas, jackfruit trees, dhavas, ankolas, lovely tinisas, bilva trees, tinduka and bamboo, kashmaya, arishta and varuna, madhukas, tilaka trees, badari and myrobalan trees, nipa trees, cane, danvas, and promegranate trees, the mountain looks splendid.

O auspiciouslooking one, behold these highspirited kinneras in pairs who are sporting on the picturesque hill plateaus causing thrills.

Behold the captivating sporting retreats of Vidyadharis, with their swords and best garments hung on the branches of the trees.

Behold a waterfall here and a fountain there gushing from the earth and in other places, the mountain looks like an elephant rutting ichor.

The breeze from the caves carrying the fragrance of many flowers is satisfying the sense of smell. Who will not find it delightful?

O flawless one, if I am to live here for many years to come with you and Lakshmana,  no grief will consume me.

O lovely Sita, I am enamoured of this delightful mountain with its enchanting peaks laden with abundance of flowers and fruits and flocked by different kinds of birds.

By living in the forest I have achieved a twofold benefitdischarge of debt of my father with regard to righteousness and causing happiness to Bharata.

O Sita, are you enjoying by being with me here on this Chitrakuta and observing various objects gratifying to the body, mind and speech?

My greatgrandfathers and ancient royal sages used to say that living in the forest is like enjoying nectar for a king for the best existence after death.

Several hundreds of massive rocks of the mountain look splendid all around, in blueblack, yellow, white and red colours.

Herbs in thousands on this king of the hills shine in the night with the splendour of their own lustre, like flames of fire.

O lovely Sita Some regions of the mountain look like dwellingplaces, some others are like flowergardens and some are shining like a single rock.

This Chitrakuta mountain stands erect as if it has arisen by splitting open the earth and its peak looks graceful from every side.

Behold those excellent couches of lovers spread with leaves of kustha, sthagara, punnaga and bhurja and covered with lotus petals.

O Lady, behold those lotus garlands crushed and cast aside by lovers and also many fruits (tasted by them and) lying there.

This Chitrakuta mountain, with abundance of roots, fruits and water surpasses in beauty Vasvaukasara, the capital city of Kubera or Nalini, his celestial garden or the land of Uttarakuru.

O my beloved Sita, by spending time with you and Lakshmana following the path of the virtuous with utmost restraint and by enhancing the righteousness of my race, I shall obtain great felicity.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे चतुर्नवतितमस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the ninetyfourth sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.