Burning with anger to see his sister fallen down disfigured and drenched in blood, Khara enquiredः

Get up, give up your confusion and stupefaction. Tell me clearly by whom you have been disfigured like this ?

Who will hurt an innocent, venomous black serpent and stay away quietly close by for fun with his finger tip?

Who is he who has tied has tied his throat with the noose of death out of ignorance and yet does not know the implications ? Who is he who has caused this injury to you, but does not understand that he has drunk deadly poison.

You have sufficient strength and courage. You are capable of moving as you like and taking any form at your will. By whom have you been brought to this state and drawn close to death?

Which valiant person among gods, gandharvas, sages and other great people, has disfigured you like this ?

I can see none in this world who can offend me, nor even the thousandeyed Indra among the gods.

Just as the swan drinks only milk from water (mixed with milk), my arrows will (unerringly) drain the life from the enemy's body right now.

Whose foamy, red blood will the earth drink while I strike his vital organs with my arrows in the fight ?

Whose flesh will be eaten by cheerful flocks of (vultures), biting and tearing his body when he is killed by me in the battle ?

Neither gods nor devils nor gandharvas nor even demons will have the power to rescue that hapless creature dragged by me ruthlessly in the battle.

You should tell me as you slowly regain your consciousness which bragart has overpowered you in the forest with his strength.

On hearing her angry brother, Surpanakha replied with words choked with tearsः

Here are two young sons of Dasaratha, Rama and Lakshmana, who are gentle, handsome, strong, with eyes like white lotus, wearing deerskin and bark robes, living on fruits and roots, selfrestrained like ascetics and following the righteous path.

They are kings of the gandharvas with all royal insignia. I was not able to discern whether they are gods or humans.

I saw between them a young, beautiful woman of slender waist, adorned with all kinds of jewels.

I have been subjected to this state of an orphan unfaithful woman by both of them for the sake of that lady.

I wish to drink the foamy blood of that crooked woman and of both the brothers slain on the battle front.

O dear this is my first wish and you must fulfil it. I will drink her blood and of the two brothers, in the battle.

As she was speaking, the inflamed Khara ordered fourteen very strong demons, comparable to Yama, the god of death, to proceed.

Two human beings equipped with weapons, clad in bark robes and deerskin have entered the dreadful Dandaka forest along with a woman of bewitching beauty.

I want you to get both of them along with that notorious woman killed. This sister of mine will drink their blood.

O demons quickly go and crush them with your power and fulfil my sister's sincere wish.

Thus commanded, the fourteen demons along with Surpanakha rushed there like windblown clouds.

The nightrangers were unable to crush him(Rama) despite their sharp, glowing weapons just as wild elephants cannot face all at once the rising flame of the forest fire.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अरण्यकाण्डे एकोनविंशस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the nineteenth sarga of Aranyakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.