The invincible and selfpossessed Rama entered the great forest of Dandaka and saw there a multitude of hermitages of the ascetics.

They (the hermitages) were strewn all over with kusa grass and robes by bark with auspicious sacrificial materials around and hence dazzling like the orb of the sun in the sky difficult to gaze.

The courtyards (of the hermitages) were cleanswept, sprinkled with water and decorated. They provided shelter to all kinds of creatures and were filled all over with flocks of birds and antelopes.

The hermitages looked glorified with dances by celestial damsels. They were adorned with vast fire sanctuaries, ladles for sacrificial ceremonies, deerskins and kusa grass faggots for pots of water, roots and fruits. They looked delightful with huge sacred trees of the forest laden with sweet fruits.

The hermitages where various sacrificial offerings were made reverberated with Vedic chantings. Flowers were scattered all over. There was a lotuspond with lotuses. There were aged, selfrestrained sages glowing like the Sun or the fire, living on fruits and roots, clothed in bark and dark deerskin.

The hermitages echoing with the sounds of Vedic recitations and resembling the very abode of Brahma were adorned with great, holy sages living on regulated diet.

The illustrious, effulgent Rama saw groups of hermitages adorned with venerable brahmins, with knowledge of the Supreme Spirit. On seeing them he loosened the string of his great bow and went forward.

On seeing Rama with illustrious Sita, the great sages, richly endowed with divine knowledge, went forward to greet him.

The sages, steadfast in their vows, saw Rama who was shining like the rising Moon, Lakshmana and the famed Sita went forward and received them with words of benediction.

Those sages living in the forest were wonderstruck to see the handsome, graceful, delicate and welldressed Rama.

All the foresters looked at the wonderful figures of Rama, Sita and Lakshmana with unblinking eyes.

Ever engaged in the welfare of all beings, the sages made Rama, their guest, sit in their leafy hut.

The great sages comparable to the firegod and followers of righteousness honoured Rama according to tradition by offering water.

The sages who were knowers of dharma saluted the noble Rama, offered fruits, roots and flowers available at the hermitage and with folded palms said thusः

O king of great reputation, you are the refuge of the people, a protector of dharma, a chastiser of wrongdoers, a worshipful and respectable preceptor.

O Rama, in this world a king is considered the fourth part of Indra as he protects the people. Therefore, he is respected and he enjoys the choicest pleasures of life.

Since we are the residents of your territory we deserve to be protected by you. Whether you live in the city or in the forest, you are the lord of the people and our king.

O king, we have conquered our anger and have controlled our senses. We ascetics have cast aside all our authority. We are like your children and need to be protected by you forever

Having said so, the ascetics offered with reverence fruits, roots, flowers and other forest products to Rama and Lakshmana.

The lawabiding ascetics, who were comparable to fire and who were accomplished in their penances, pleased lord Rama in a befitting manner.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अरण्यकाण्डे प्रथमस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the first sarga of Aranyakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.