The frightful Surpanakha came to the hermitage of Rama and showed both the brothers and Sita to the demons.

They saw mighty Rama together with Vaidehi and Lakshmana sitting in the leafthatched cottage.

Seeing the demons along with Surpanakha arrive, said the handsome Rama, scion of the Raghu dynasty to his brother Lakshmana, who was blazing like fire ः

O Lakshmana stand by Sita for a while. I shall kill these demons who have come here.

Lakshmana heard him and in turn honoured the word of Rama, knower of the self.

Righteous Rama too, lifted up his great bow decked with gold and fastened the string and then said to the demonsः

We, Rama and Lakshmana, sons of Dasaratha, are brothers, who have entered the inaccessible Dandaka forest along with Sita.

Feeding on fruits and roots and following the righteous path, we are living in Dandaka forest like ascetics. Why are you torturing us?

I came here equipped with bows, arrows and weapons, asked by ascetics to kill in the battle sinners like you who are offending them.

If you care for your life, you may return, or else, if you please you may remain (die) here, O demons.

At these words, the destroyers of brahmins, the fourteen demons were inflamed. They lifted their spears and spokeः

You have incited the wrath of Khara, our great master for which you will now pay with your life in the fight.

How can you face us alone? We outnumber you? Leave alone fighting, you cannot even stand in front of us.

Come on with daggers and sharpedged spears hurled, you will give up your life,your prowess as well as the bow held in your hand.

Saying these words, the fourteen infuriated demons hurled their spears at invincible Rama.

All the fourteen spears hurled turned into splinters by the same number of golden arrows released by Rama.

Then the effulgent Rama, mighty angry, took fourteen arrows sharpened by stones and glowing like the Sun.

Rama took the bow, stretched it and aimed at his target, the demons and sent the arrows as Indra would release the thunderbolt.

Goldfeathered blazing arrows decorated with gold, released by Rama flew fast and pierced the chests of the demons. Drenched in blood they (the arrows) thundered (out of their chests) and plunged into the earth.

With their hearts split, their bodies drenched in blood, disfigured and lifeless, the demons fell down on earth like trees cut at the roots.

Seeing the demons fallen on the ground, the demoness wild with anger and fear roared.

Her blood slightly dried up, she came back afflicted to Khara and fell down like a sallaki tree, its sap oozing.

Missing

Then desperately screaming and shedding tears with a sad face beside her brother, she roared again and again.

When Surpanakha saw the demons fall dead on the battleground, she ran to Khara,her brother and told in detail about the death of the demons.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अरण्यकाण्डे विंशस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the twentieth sarga of Aranyakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.