Seeing Surpanakha collapse, Khara said in clear terms about the unfortunate situation she had createdः

The valiant demons who feed on blood have been commissioned for your pleasure. Why are you crying again?

They are loyal and faithful to me. They are always my wellwishers. Even when attacked, they cannot be killed. They never fail to carry out my orders.

I wish to know what makes you lament and roll on the ground like a serpent and hissing?

When I am here like a lord to protect you, why do you weep like an orphan? Get up. Give up your anxiety. Be not afraid.

Thus consoled by Khara, invincible Surpanakha wiped her tearful eyes and said to her brotherः

My ears and nose sliced off, drenched with blood, I came to you and you pacified me.

O warrior you had sent, out of anger, fourteen demons to put an end to Rama along with Lakshmana in order to please me.

The demons who went with spears in their hands were killed, their hearts pierced by Rama's arrows.

Seeing the powerful demons collapse on the ground in a moment's time through Rama's action, I was frightened.

O demon I am scared and sad. To me everything looks frightening. I, therefore, seek refuge in you.

I am drowned in a vast sea of sorrow where crocodiles in the form of distress reside. It is full of rows of waves of fright. Why do you not save me?

The demons who live on flesh, who came following me fell down on earth and lay dead, shot by the sharp arrows of Rama.

O demon if you have compassion for me or for the demons, if you have the power and energy to face Rama, kill the enemy of the demons living in Dandaka forest.

If now you do not kill that Rama, my enemy, O shameless one, I will give up my life in your very presence.

Instinctively I can foresee that you and your army do not have the capability to encounter that great Rama in a fight.

You call yourself a hero, yet are not able to kill two humans like Rama and Lakshmana. Your claim to heroism is false. You are not a hero at all.

O demon you are a disgrace to the family. If you have power or energy, kill that Rama dwelling in Dandaka forest.

You have little strength and less heroism. You with your relations should immediately leave Janasthana. What kind of position do you have here?

Let down by the brilliance of Rama, son of Dasaratha, you will be soon destroyed. He is mighty and his brother who has disfigured me is very valiant.

Overcome by sorrow, the bigbellied demoness cried in several ways and being very sad started beating her chest with both hands.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अरण्यकाण्डे एकविंशस्सर्गः।  Thus ends the twentyfirst sarga of Aranyakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.