As the army marched from there (Janasthana) a huge dark cloud of the colour of an ass rained dreadful inauspicious water, red as blood.

The swift horses yoked to the chariot stumbled casually while galloping on the plane highway sprinkled with flowers.

A dark ring, bloodred in colour appeared on the border of the Sun's orb, dark in the  middle. This phenomenon of the Sun appeared like a ring of moving charcoal covering the Sun.

A huge vulture, frightening to look at flew up and sat on top of the flag on the staff of gold.

Flesheating beasts and birds flocked at Janasthana producing a cacophony.

The dreadful jackals making ghastly howls turning towards the illuminated direction and produced frightening sounds indicating inauspicious time for the demons.

The clouds looked like shattered mountains pouring down bloodlike rain which filled the sky and made it appear frighteningly different.

A terrific darkness, spread all over, produced frightening horripilation. Even the four quarters and the intermediary zones were not discernible.

Even before Sunset the twilight looked like a fresh wound. Then wild animals, birds, kankas, jackals and vultures facing towards Khara screeched, indicating danger.

Bad omens that always bring inauspiciousness were a dreadful evidence of what is going to happen. Jackals howled, facing Khara's army with their mouths emitting fire.

The planet Ketu appeared like an iron beam near the Sun. Although it was not the fullmoon or newmoon day, Rahu eclipsed the Sun. Wind blew hard and the Sun was lustreless.

The stars rose in the sky and glittered like fireflies even before night arrived. The fishes and the aquatic birds in the lotusponds hid themselves under water. Lotuses dried up in tanks and the trees stood bereft of flowers and fruits.

Although there was no wind, dust rose like a brown cloud and the sarika birds sang (vichi kuchi) thoughtlessly.

Dreadful to watch were the thunderstorms and the meteors that dropped down from the sky. The earth trembled all over with mountains, groves and forests.

While the intelligent and courageous Khara was seated on the chariot and shouting,  his left shoulder shook violently and throat throttled.

While watching all this, his eyes brimmed with tears. His forehead ached. Yet he was too deluded to beat a retreat.

Looking at these dreadful, horripilating occurrences Khara laughed and said to the demonsः

Valiant and strong, I do not take seriously these terrifying omens boding calamity just as a strong man does not care for the weak.

With my sharp arrows I can even bring down the stars from the sky. If angered, I can cause mortality to the god of death.

I do not wish to return, without killing with my sharp arrows that Rama who is proud of his strength and his brother Lakshmana.

Let my sister be satisfied by drinking the blood of both Rama and Lakshmana on whose account this adversity has come.

I have never faced defeat in wars, and all of you have seen it with your eyes. I am not telling you a lie.

When angry, I can kill even (Indra) the wielder of the thunderbolt, rider of the intoxicated Airavata and lord of the gods. What to speak of these two petty humans?

Fallen into the deathtrap, the great army of the demon, felt very happy on hearing Khara roaring.

Great souls like sages, gods, gandharvas, and siddhas including celestial bards assembled to see the battle.

Holy men assembled and uttered benedictions, saying, 'let there be wellbeing for the cows and brahmins associated with men of pious deeds in all the (three) worlds.

'Let Rama conquer the descendants of Paulasthya in the war like Visnu, the wielder of the wheel had defeated great demons'.

The great ascetics were talking thus and more. The gods waiting eagerly on heavenly chariots saw the army of the demons whose life span was shortened (who were doomed to death).

Seeing Khara, their chief on the chariot driving fast, the army of demons too marched forward.

Surrounded by twelve valiant warriors like Syenagami, Pruthugreeva, Yagnasatru, Vihangama, Durjaya, Karaviraksha, Parusha, Kalakarmuka, Meghmali, Mahamali, Sarpasya and Rudhirasana, Khara proceeded.

Similarly Dusana proceeded with four Mahakapali, Sthulaksha, Pramathi and Trisira around him.

The mighty, swiftfooted army of valiant demons surrounded the princes (Rama and Lakshmana) all on a sudden like the planets around the Sun and the Moon.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अरण्यकाण्डे त्रयोविंशस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the twentythird sarga of Aranyakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.