As Khara advanced towards Rama, Trisira the chief of the army approached him and said these wordsः

O valiant one assign this work to me. Refrain from this audacity. See how I am going to put down the mightyarmed Rama in the battle.

I promise you on my weapon that I will kill Rama.He who killed all demons deserves to be slain.

Restrain yourself for a moment from the enthusiasm to fight the war. Please act as an arbitrator and see who is killing whom.

If Rama is killed be happy and go to Janasthana or else if I am killed you can fight.

When Khara was prevailed upon by Trisara in that manner with a wish to face death, Khara permitted him by saying 'You may go and fight'.Accordingly he advanced towards Rama.

Trisira who looked a mountain with three peaks also got horses harnessed to a shining chariot and to attack Rama proceeded.

Trisira unleashed a stream of arrows like a huge cloud (releasing rain). They produced sound, a drum drenched with water, creates.

On seeing demon Trisira advancing towards him, Rama shook sharp arrows off his bow.

The tumultuous combat between Rama and Trisira looked like the strong fight between a lion and an elephant.

Then Rama hit with three arrows on the forehead by Trisira flew into a fury and said in a state of great excitementः

Oh see the strength of this undaunted demon whose arrows fell like flowers on my forehead and only left a scratch.

Receive the arrows released from my bowstring. Saying so, the angry and agitated Rama discharged fourteen arrows, venomous like a snake, on the chest of Trisira .

With four arrows having strong joints, the mighty hero (Rama) threw down his enemy's four swiftfooted horses.

Rama brought down the charioteer with eight arrows and with one tore down the lofty banner of the chariot to shreds.

Rama then hit the demon with arrows on his chest while he was running away from the broken chariot. The demon became numb.

The mighty Rama in fury dismembered the heads of that demon with three sharp and swift arrows.

The demon with his heads decapitated, hit by Rama's arrows a little while ago, fell down, vomitting blood.

Those surviving demons who were under the protection of Khara got scared and retreated fast and fled like deer frightened by a tiger.

Personally persuading the fleeing army to come back, the angry Khara leaped forward towards Rama just as Rahu approaches the moon.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अरण्यकाण्डे सप्तविंशस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the twentyseventh sarga of Aranyakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.