Khara was overtaken by fear at the prowess of Rama, when he saw Dusana and Trisira killed.

Khara, the mighty demon, saw his large, irrepressible army killed. He saw Trisira and Dusana slain singlehanded by Rama. Nervous, he advanced towards Rama wage war just as Namuchi approached Indra.

Khara drew his strong bowstring in anger and released the bloodhungry arrows, which appeared like venomous snakes.

Khara, sat on the chariot, and with a twang of his bowstring released arrows in all directions, exhibiting his skill in the use of weapons.

When Rama, the great warrior, saw Khara approaching him, he fixed powerful arrows on his bow and covered all directions and intermediate quarters with his arrows.

He rained sparkling arrows which were irresistible. He filled the sky with arrows just as the raingod fills it with rain without leaving any space.

The arrows released by Khara and Rama on one another filled the entire sky. Everywhere only arrows and no sky could be seen.

While they were engaged in the battle, eager to kill each other the sky was covered with arrow and the Sun could not be seen.

Then Khara shot Rama with Nalika darts and darts called Vikarni like goads hit a mighty elephant.

Demon Khara positioned on the chariot, bow in hand, appeared to all beings like Yama, god of death holding the noose.

Khara thought valiant Rama who had destroyed his whole army might be exhausted by now.

When Rama saw Khara aggressively advancing like a lion to attack him, he was not perturbed, for he knew he was a fawn before a lion (which Rama was).

Then Khara mounting a great chariot which was glowing like the Sun, advanced towards Rama just as an insect hurtles towards fire.

Exhibiting his agility of the hand, Khara shattered the bow and the arrow in the grip of Rama ,the great soul.

The influriated Khara this time took up seven arrows blazing like Indra's thunderbolt and hit his armour.

The armour of Rama who looked radiant like the Sun fell on the ground, struck by the welljointed darts released by Khara.

Khara then attacked Rama of unequal strength in fight, with a thousand darts and roared loudly.

Rama, scion of the Raghu race, afflicted by the darts in all parts of the body, glowed in his anger like smokeless fire burning.

Then Rama, destroyer of foes, strung another great bow of fearful sound in order to put an end to the enemy.

Thereafter Rama advanced, aiming at Khara the superior Vaishnava bow given by sage Agastya.

Rama took up in a rage the welljointed, smooth darts with golden feathers and broke the flag post of the chariot of Khara to pieces.

The beautiful, golden flag post, broken into several pieces, fell down on earth.It appeared as if the Sun had come down to earth at the behest of the gods.

Quite enraged, Khara who knew how to hit the tender parts (of the body) in an encounter sent out four arrows on Rama. It was like poking an elephant's limbs with a javelin.

Rama, hit by the arrows released from the bow of Khara, all his limbs drenched in blood, became very furious.

The best among archers and a supreme shooter, he lifted the bow, fixed his target and released six arrows in the great fight.

Rama hit one arrow on the head, two on the shoulders and three of the shape of the crescent moon on the chest (of the enemy).

Enraged and effulgent Rama took up thirteen darts, radiant like the Sun, with a wish to kill the demon.

Rama, like Indra, strong and mighty, broke the yoke of Khara's chariot with one arrow, the four horses with four arrows, and with the sixth the charioteer's head, with three others the main pole of the chariot, with two the axle of the chariot, and with the twelfth Khara's bow and arrows were splintered. As if laughing at him, he pierced Khara's body with the thirteenth arrow.

Then, with bow broken, chariot destroyed, horses and charioteer dead, Khara jumped down the chariot and stood on the ground holding a mace.

Then the gods, along with great sages came down in aerial chariots and assembled there. Delighted, they adored Rama, the great warrior, with folded hands for the work done.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकिय आदिकाव्ये अरण्यकाण्डे अष्टाविंशस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the twentyeigth sarga of Aranyakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.