O dear Maricha hear my words. I am distressed and you are my ultimate refuge.

You know that my brothers, Khara and Dusana, the strongarmed heroes, my sister Surpanakha and the mighty cannibal Trisira, and many other heroic demons successful in hitting their targets are bonafide residents. They have been harassing the followers of righteous path (the sages) at my behest.

These fourteen thousand heroes, perpetrators of terrible deeds, skilled in hitting the targets had been acting according to the direction of Khara.

These mighty demons, living in Janasthana, eqipped with different kinds of weapons, supported and led by Khara, met Rama in an encounter.

With his wrath generated, Rama, without even speaking anything, used his bow and the arrows.

Being a human being who fought on foot, he killed fourteen thousand ferocious demons with his sharp arrows.

Khara, Dusana and Trisira were killed in war.The residents of Dandaka forest are rendered safe and fearless.

Rama, a victim of his father's anger, banished into the forest with his wife, a shortlived mortal and a calumny on the kshatriyas has killed the army of demons.

He is a man of bad conduct, harsh, sharptonged, stupid, miserly and a slave to his senses. He is immoral and unrighteous, one who is busy harming others.

With no enmity whatsoever, merely because he has strength, he cut off the nose and ears of my sister and mutilated her. His wife Sita is like the daughter of heaven. I would like to abduct her with force from Janasthana for which you should be my accomplice.

You are mighty. I do not care to fight even the gods when you and my brothers are by my side. Therefore, O demon, be my accomplice. (I know) you are capable of that.

In valour, in war and in conceit there is no one equal to you. You know all means (of success). You are great. You are brave. You are an expert in all deceitful arts.

I have come to you for this purpose seeking your help. Listen to my words on what you should doः

Be a wonderful golden deer dappled with silver dots and roam in front of Sita in Rama's hermitage.

Seeing you in the form of a deer, Sita will undoubtedly ask her husband and Lakshmana to capture you.

Then during their absence it will be easy for me to abduct Sita in an isolated place without obstruction, like Rahu eclipsing the light of the moon.

Thereafter, when Rama with his soul afflicted due to his wife's abduction. I can freely, happily, successfully strike him down.

At the mention of Rama's name, great Maricha's mouth dried up and he became concerned.

Licking his dried up lips, as though his eyes stopped winking like those of the dead, Maricha stared at Ravana, distressed.

Maricha who knows of Rama's valour was frightened and depressed at heart. He revealed to Ravana with folded hands some facts for mutual benefit.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये अरण्यकाण्डे षट् त्रिंशस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the thirtysixth sarga of Aranyakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.