On hearing the voice in distress and recognising that it was similar to her husband's voice, Sita said to Lakshmana, 'Go and find out Rama's whereabouts'.

I clearly heard Rama calling out in great distress. Indeed, my heart as well as my life is not in its place (restless). You ought to go and protect your brother who is crying in pain in the forest.

Like a bull caught by lions, your brother is seeking help caught by demons. You should run at once to your brother.

When he did not budge in obedience to his brother's order (to protect Sita), the daughter of Janaka in a rage said ः

Since you, O son of Sumitra, are not reaching out to your brother in this situation, you are an enemy to your brother in the guise of a friend৷৷

It is possess me that you wish Rama's death. You do not rush to him certainly because of greed for me.

I think Rama's adversity is welcome to you. You do not have any love towards your brother. It is for this that you stand unconcerned instead of proceeding to help your brilliant brother.

When he for whose service you have primary come here, has met with difficulty, what is the use of your being here? What purpose you serve by staying here with me ?

While Sita thus spoke, flooded with tears of sorrow, frightened like a doe, Lakshmana replied ः

O Vaidehi there is no doubt that pannagas, asuras, gandharvas, gods, men or even demons cannot defeat him.

O brilliant Devi none among gods or men, gandharvas, birds or goblins kinnaras, wild animals or dreadful demons can encounter Rama in war.

Rama is indestructible in war. It is not proper for you to say what you said. When he is not here I do not wish to leave you alone here in the forest.

He cannot be stopped by the strength of the mighty, or by Indra supported by gods or by the wellequipped armies of all the three worlds.

May your heart be relieved (of this fear) Give up this grief. Your husband will soon return with the excellent deer killed.

Surely it is not his voice. It is contrived by some one's illusory power. It is the illusion created by that demon, like the city of the gandharvas. (which does not exist.)

O best of women Vaidehi great Rama has entrusted your safty to me. I do not wish to leave you here alone.

O Vaidehi since the killing of Khara and the residents of Janasthana we have developed enmity with the demons.

These demons wander about tormenting others and spreading rumours of all kinds.  You need not worry about them.

Addressed thus by Lakshmana, Sita got mighty angry. Her eyes turned red and she spoke harshly to truthful Lakshmana

O ignoble, cruel Lakshmana, you are a disgrace to your family. I think this great disaster of Rama is a pleasure to you.

O Lakshmana,do you speak such words seeing the disaster of Rama? No wonder that cruel men who always move like you in disguise will thus resort to sinful action against rivals.

You are very wicked. You are hiding your true identity, and employed by Bharata, you are following Rama in the forest as he is alone.

O Lakshmana such intention of yours or even of Bharata's will not be fulfilled. I have held the hands of Rama who has eyes like the lotus petal, who has the complexion of the blue lotus. How can I prefer some other man?

I will undoubtedly give up my life in your presence.I will not live even for a moment on earth without Rama, O son of Sumitra

The selfcontrolled Lakshmana with folded palms replied to Sita's harsh, horripilating wordsः

O princess from Mithila, I do not want to use such harsh words. To me you are a deity (worthy of adoration). It is not surprising that women of the world use such undeserving words. It is their nature.

Women devoid dharma are fickle and inconsistent. They use sharp, piercing words. O daughter of Janaka, O princess from Videha, your words pierce my ears like redhot darts.I cannot tolerate them.

I speak what is just while you use harsh and unjust words. Let all beings who move in the forest bear witness.

Fie upon you. Like a woman of wicked nature you doubt me when I stood firm by my brother's words. You will go to ruin.

O beautiful lady, I will go to Rama wherever he may be. Be happy. O largeeyed one, may all the deities of the forest protect you.

O daughter of Janaka O princess from Videha, I see dreadful omens. I do not know whether I will see you when I am back with Rama.

At these words of Lakshmana Sita started crying. With eyes filled with tears she replied with harshness ः

O Lakshmana without Rama I will drown myself in Godavari or hang myself or leap from a cliff into death.

I will drink deadly poison or enter fire and die, but will not touch any other man even with my feet.

Thus Sita cried in distress, sadly hitting her belly with both the hands, blaming Lakshmana (all the time).

Saumitri saw the largeeyed, dejected Sita crying in distress.He pacified and consoled her but she did not say anything at all to her husband's brother.

Selfcomposed Lakshmana with joined palms saluted her with great reverence.And then, turning towards her again and again, left for Rama.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अरण्यकाण्डे पञ्जचत्वारिंशस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the fortyfifth sarga of Aranyakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.