When Sabari departed for heaven with her brilliance, Rama contemplated (about the power of sages)with Lakshmana.

Thinking about the power of the great sages, righteous Rama said to Lakshmana, his wellwisher with singleminded devotionः

O handsome one, we have seen this highly wonderful hermitage, where deer and tigers dwell together with mutual confidence, where birds of all kinds inhabit.

O Lakshmana, having bathed in the waters of the seven seas (by taking ritualistic bath in these waters) the manes are offered oblations in accordance with tradition.

We have got rid of inauspicious time and good days have come. Therefore, I feel truly happy. Good fortune will appear (now), O Lakshmana, O tiger among men

Come, let us go to Pampa, which is pleasing to look at. Sugriva, the rigteous self, the son of the Sun has been staying for fear of Vali at the shining Rishyamuka, not far from here.

I am hastening to see that noble Sugriva the mighty monkey, as the search for Sita depends on him, O handsome one

To the words of Rama who was of stable mind, Lakshmana replied ः My mind too is hastening me. Let us get there quickly.

Then Rama the lord of men along with Lakshmana departed from the hermitage and went to Pampa.

He saw the sacred lake Pampa whose sweet flow of water was used by great seers. It abounded in trees and creepers. Its surface was red with lotuses at one place, white with clusters of lilies at another and with blue lotuses at other places. As such, it looked like a carpet with variegated colours.

Rama reached the Matanga lake which he could see from a distance and bathed in it.

Lake Pampa was filled with red lotuses and their fragrance.The bank was lined with blossoming mango trees and trees of several kinds like tilaka trees with fruits full of seeds like citron, dhava trees, white trees in bloom, karavira trees loaded with flowers, punnaga trees, clusters of jasmine and kunda shrubs, fig trees, so also reeds, ashoka trees, atimuktaka creepors and several other trees looking like women adorned all over. Rama and Lakshmana passed by, glancing at them. There were other trees full of flowers, huge trees, koyashtika trees with reed. Different kinds of birds such as peacocks, parrots, dwelling in the forest were screaming aloud. Looking at all these in that forest Rama and Lakshmana passed by undisturbed with a composed mind.

Rama saw lake Pampa with cool waters and the groves on the bank filled with tilaka, ashoka, punnaga, bakula and uddala trees.

On seeing different kinds of trees and tanks, the lovestriken Rama visited that great lake.

There were lovely pleasuregardens in full bloom filled with sal and champk trees. Honeybees on flowers looked lovely and bright. The waters were crystalclear and fragrant with lotuses.The soft sands on the banks of Pampa gleamed. Rama saw them again and again and described them to Lakshmana.

The famous mount, sacred Rishyamuka is situated on the bank of Pampa full of blossoming trees.

The mighty son of Riksharaja, the great soul, the Sun whose son was the wellknown Sugriva, resides on this mountain.

Rama said to Lakshmana, the best of men, who had truth as his strength, Go to Sugriva, lord of the monkeys.

O Lakshmana, deprived of the kingdom I have become a destitute. With my heart attached to Sita how can I live without her ?

Having said these words to Lakshmana who was listening to him with undivided attention, Rama, the best of the Raghus, oppressed by love and afflicted by tears of grief entered Pampa, the delightful lotuslake.

Thereafter, going slowly to a distance, Rama and Lakshmana saw Pampa surrounded by beautiful forests full of many varieties of birds.  इत्यार्ष श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अरण्यकाण्डे पञ्चसप्ततिमस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the seventyfifth sarga of Aranyakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.