Lakshmana's righteous elder brother left Rishyamuka with Sugriva for Kishkinda protected by Vali's valour.

Getting ready to go, Rama took up his great bow and arrows adorned with gold and potent in war looking (dazzling) like the Sun.

The strongnecked Sugriva and mighty Lakshmana walked in front of the highsouled Rama.

Brave and brilliant Hanuman, Nala, Nila, and Tara among the leaders of the monkeys walked behind.

They saw (on the way) trees bent down with the load of flowers, and rivers with pure water flowing into the sea.

(They saw) beautiful valleys, mountains, caves, prominent peaks with deep caverns.

Observing on the way delightful lotus buds with leaves like Vaidurya, clear water and full tanks (They moved on).

Ducks, cranes, swans, vanjulas, waterfowls, chakravakas and other birds warbling melodiously.

They observed deer feeding on tender grass on the ground around without fear, some standing and some roaming the forest

Observing terrific elephants adorned with white tusks wandering alone destroying the tanks, shattering the banks.

(Observing) intoxicated elephants knocking the edges of mountain slopes, elephants resembling (dark) rainbearing clouds, elephants like moving mountains, elephants with dust covered all over the body.

Following Sugriva faithfully, they proceeded swiftly, observing animals of the forest and birds flying in the sky.

While walking fast, looking at the forest full of trees Rama, the delight of the Raghus said to Sugrivaः

'This cluster of trees surrounded by plantain groves look splendid like a vast collection of clouds in the sky.

'O friend I wish to know what this is? Could you answer my curiosity?'

On hearing great Rama's words while walking in the extensive forest, Sugriva started  narratingः

'O Raghava this is a hermitage, enchanting with vast gardens and trees bearing sweet fruits, full of tasty roots and water that relieves tiresomeness (of travellers).



'These seven sages used to live on air and that too once in seven nights. They lived for seven hundred years performing penance with motionlessness and attained heaven along with their bodies.

'By virtue of the power of their penance, this hermitage surrounded by a row of trees is impenetrable even for demons and gods including Indra.

'Birds and wild animals avoid the hermitage and whoever enters there out of ignorance never returns.

'O Rama, one can hear pleasant sounds of jingling ornaments (of nymphs), of songs and windinstruments here. One can inhale divine fragrance, too.

'The three sacred fires keep burning and the thick smoke they emit resembles the red feet of pigeons. It shines forth as if enveloping the treetops.

'These treetops covered with thick smoke glow like mountains of Vaidurya concealed by a cluster of clouds.

'O rigteous Rama you and your brother Lakshmana humbly offer obeisance to them(sacred hermitage and sages Saptajana) with folded hands and meditate on them.

'O Rama, nothing inauspicious happens to them who offer obeisance to those highly spiritual sacred sages.'

Rama and Lakshmana offered salutations with folded hands in memory of those great sages, great souls.

Righteous Rama, Lakshmana, Sugriva and all the monkeys offered obeisance and proceeded delighted at heart.

Walking a long distance from the hermitage of the seven seers, they beheld the unassailable Kishkinda ruled by Vali.

Rama and Lakshmana of fierce lustre, and the monkeys took hold of the weapons to kill the enemy and reached the capital ruled by the valour of Vali, son of Indra.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे त्रयोदशस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the thirteenth sarga of Kishkindakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.