Tara kissed (smelt) the forehead of the king of monkeys who had departed and saidः

'O hero, not caring for my words (of caution), you are now lying with great pain on hard stones on the ground.

'O lord of monkeys you lie in the end, embracing the earth and not replying to me.  Surely you deem this earth dearer than me.

'O lover of brave deeds, fate has brought you under the sway of Sugriva, although he had lost to you.

'Oh powerful Vali leaders of the bears and monkeys, the entire lot are standing near you, wailing. Angada has been crying in grief. How is it that you are not rising up even after hearing their wailing voices and my call? .

'Earlier you have killed enemies in combats and made them lie down where now you lie.

'O venerable hero, born in a pure and noble family, you are a lover of battles. Now you have left me an orphan.

'It is said by wise men that a girl should not be given in marriage to a warrior. See me, the wife of a warrior, now rendered a widow.

'My pride is crushed. My husband, the ultimate resort for me is shattered.I am  plunged in a vast, bottomless ocean of grief.

'My heart is surely made of hard stone yet it has not split into a hundred pieces even on seeing my husband slain৷৷

'He was my husband, my friend and naturally my loving king. He was powerful in battle.Alas the hero has died.

'Even if a woman without husband, is blessed with sons and abundant wealth and grain, still learned people call her a widow.

'O hero how is it that you are lying in a crimson bed of the pool of blood flowing from your body?

'O bull among monkeys how can I embrace you with my arms as your body is covered with dust particles and blood?.

'Sugriva has achieved his goal in his dreadful enmity (with you). His fear is dispelled by a single arrow released by Rama.

'The arrow which has pierced your body prevents me from embracing you. I am only looking at you lying (not removing the arrow lest you die).'

Then Nila took out the arrow from Vali's heart with due effort as one would pull out a glowing serpent hidden in the mountain cave.

As the arrrow(drenched in blood) was being pulled out, its glow looked like the Sun's rays obstructed by the peak of the western mountain.

The streams of blood that flowed all over from the wounds of his body appeared like streams of water mixed with red and copper colour.

She (Tara) wiped the body wounded with the weapon and covered with wardust, sprinkling her tear drops from her eyes.

Turning to the body of her husband fully drenched in blood, thus spoke Tara to her tawnyeyed son Angadaः

'O son you see the most terrific end of your father on whom enmity forced sinful deeds.

'O son offer salutations to your venerable father, the king, departing for the abode of Yama (lord of death) looking (red with blood) like the rising Sun.'

Thus advised by Tara, Angada got up, clasped his father's feet with his stout arms, and saluted, saying, 'I am Angada.'

'Why do you not, with the words 'May you live long'', bless, as before, your son Angada who is greeting you? (said Tara).

'Just like a cow followed by its calf would attend upon a mighty bull struck by a lion I will wait with my son upon you who have lost consciousness (died).

'You have performed a warsacrifice. You have bathed in the waters of Rama's weapon signifying the end of the sacrifice. How did you take this customary bath without me, your wife?

'Why do I not see on your chest the golden necklace gifted by the king of the gods (Indra), pleased with you in the battle?

'O venerable one, even though life has departed from you, kingly glory does not leave you any more than the light of the setting son leaves the king of mountains. (western mountain)

'You have not followed my advice. I did not have the capacity to prevent you from going to war. The result is, you are killed and I am ruined along with my son. The goddess of fortune also is deserting me as well as your son.'  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे त्रयोविंशस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the twentythird sarga of Kishkindakanda of the Holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.