Hanuman, son of the Windgod, saw the clear sky flooded with lovely moonlight, free from clouds and lightning and cackling of herons. He noticed that because Sugriva had attained abundant wealth and merit, he was not taking care of the kingdom. He was engrossed in sensual pleasures. Having accomplished the desired object, he was engaged in enjoyment of the company of women, his own wives and Tara, whom he coveted. He was strolling (in the pleasant garden) night and day without caring for the kingdom, entrusting it to the ministers whose movements he did not watch. He was sporting with women like Indra sports with apsaras in the Nandana garden.Hanuman, who was conscious of his duties and responsibilities, who was aware of the importance of action in time and who was skilful in speech approached Sugriva, king of the monkeys. Having decided to take him into confidence, Hanuman spoke in a convincing, wellmeaning, sweet, pleasing manner words truthful and helpful, conciliatory and just, full of love and affectionः

'You have attained the kingdom. You have earned fame. The prosperity of your family has gone up. All that remains is to earn the goodwill of friends. Attend to that now.

'The kingdom, glory and fame of a king who knows the value of time and conducts himself well towards his allies always grows.

'He to whom the treasury, sceptre, allies and his own self all these are equally dear, enjoys a large kingdom.

'Endowed with right conduct, you ought to duly answer the cause of your ally conforming to proper course of action.

'Whoever sets aside his personal interest and works for the welfare of his ally with due enthusiasm and excitement will not be harmed.

'He who exceeds the time limit in accomplishing a friend's task, and puts forth great effort later succeeds not.

'O subduer of enemies we should do the brave deed of finding Vaidehi for the sake of your friend. O crusher of enemies this is your duty at present and it is already delayed.

'O king a wise man (like Rama) who is aware of timely action would not tell you even if it is unduly delayed, even when he is in a hurry to get the work done, since he is staying in your kingdom (since he is dependant on you).

'Rama is responsible in lending stability to you and to your wellknown family. He will continue to be your ally for a long time. Let it be known that his power is boundless and his virtues peerless.

'O king pray accomplish his object the same way he has accomplished your own. You ought to issue orders to the foremost of the monkeys.

'Time will not be deemed lapsed in vain if the work is sincerely taken up without delay and without pressure from your ally, Rama. If it is undertaken under pressure, it will be considered transgression of time.

'O lord of monkeys help even a person who has not helped you. As such, do you need to be told that you should help one, with whose help you have earned wealth and kingdom?

'O protector of the monkeys, you are powerful and you are prompt. Why don't you issue orders which will please Rama?

'Indeed, Rama is fully capable of subduing gods, demons as well as nagas with his arrows. He is looking for your help in view of your promise.

'He has done you a deed dear to you without hesitation, risking his own life.Let us help him in search of his Vaidehi whether she is on earth or in heaven.

'Not gods, demons, gandharvas or even marutas, suras or yakshas can cause fright in him much less the rakshasas.

'Therefore, O king of monkeys you ought to oblige Rama wholeheartedly exerting all your strength, as he has done your work.

'O lord of monkeys commanded by you, each one of us or all of us together can ransack the underworld, the earth, or water or heaven.

O sinless hero therefore issue your command. There are more than a crore of invincible monkeys. Determine now who should do and what and in which place. We are at your service'.

Sugriva who had a great sense of duty, started applying his mind, when he heard the honest advice of Hanuman.

He sent word to the ever diligent Nila, his favourite, to collect all cadres of army of the monkeys from all directions.

'Let the entire army with leaders of different groups assemble here seperately. O chief of army act accordingly.

'Let the swiftfooted monkeys, guardians of frontiers, army chiefs muster soon in obedience to my command. You (Nila) alone should personally supervise the work to be done next.



'In strict obedience to my orders, go with Angada to the elderly monkeys and inform them about my decision and order'. After making this arrangement valiant Sugriva entered his residence.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे एकोनत्रिंशस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the twentyninth sarga of Kishkindakanda of the Holy Ramayana, the first epic, composed by sage Valmiki.