While Sugriva was in his residence, Rama was (in Prasravana mountain) spending his rainy nights tormented by passion (for Sita). Sugriva was engaged in love, forgetting the time fixed for taking up the search for Sita. When the sky became clear of clouds after the rainy season, Rama sat gazing at the clear autumnal Moon's orb. He was besmeared with moonlight and felt perturbed as time was running out. And then fell into a swoon. (only a few months remained for the completion of the exile and Bharata will put an end to himself if Rama does not return to Ayodhya on the stipulated day. This worried Rama.)

Gaining back the senses after a while, wise Rama started thinking about Vaidehi, who remained in his heart.

Sitting on top of the mountain shining with gold and minerals, Rama gazed at the pleasant autumnal sky and started thinking of his beloved.

Looking at the sky rid of clouds and lightning, filled with the sounds of flocks of sarasa birds, Rama cried in a pitiable state.

'How will the young lady (Sita) whose voice is like the sarasa bird's, who was revelling, listening to its sweet cackle at the hermitage be living now?

'How will my beloved wife feel on seeing the asana flowers which are as pure as gold, when she does not find me anywhere?

'How will my Sita with her charming limbs and sweet words, who used to get up from sleep by the cackle of swans, wake up now?

'How will that lady with large, pale white eyes sustain her life now, since she is used to listening to the sweet notes of chakravaka birds, who were her companions?

'Even though I am wandering by lakes, rivers, wells, forests and groves,I am not happy without that fawneyed lady.

'I think even the charm of autumn must be always tormenting that lovely lady, as she is very far from me. She is too delicate to suffer the agony of separation.'

Thus the best among the princes wailed just as chakrabaka laments for water from  Indra, lord of the gods.

Graceful Lakshmana returned after going round and round the beautiful mountain slopes for fruits and saw his brother.

Observing Rama who had lost his senses, lying alone in unbearable agony, venerable Lakshmana became sad and miserable and spoke to his brotherः

'O revered brother why do you succumb to passion and loss of selfconfidence? Why is the usual composure of your mind withdrawn? Why do you desist from yaga?

'You are an undaunted warrior. Take to the path of action. Resort to samadhiyoga or meditation and regain the serenity of mind. Make the strength of your effort the source of your success.

'O lord of the human race O worthy hero when you are the protector, Janaki cannot be retained by any one easily just as burning fire after it reaches its full height cannot be retained by any one.'

Rama said to Lakshmana, an unassailable warrior with auspicious signs, that what he had spoken was natural, beneficial, wise and useful.It is in accordance with Sama Veda and the science of statecraft, well established in dharma and artha.

'My dear, there is no doubt that I have to consider the work (ahead), give special attention to follow up. Surely I need to think over this herculian task and its achievement'.

Then falling back on the memory of Maithili, the lady with eyes like lotus petals, he said to Lakshmana with parched lipsः

'Having satisfied the earth with abundant rain water and having fulfilled the task of ripening the crops, the thousandeyed Indra has done his duty, has settled down now.

'O prince having discharged their water the clouds (after the rains) are exhausted. They are moving now over trees and mountains, making deep and pleasant sounds.

'The clouds, which were dark till now like the blue lotus petals darkening all the ten directions are like elephants free from all intoxication as their fury is abated৷৷

'O dear the moist winds have ceased to blow as before and are carrying the fragrance of kutaja and arjuna flowers.

'O sinless Lakshmana the rumblings of heavy clouds, the trumpeting of elephants, the cry of peacocks and the sound of waterfalls have become suddenly stilled.

'The mountain slopes, having been washed by the showers of rain on all sides, are cleansed. They are shining in variegated colours and look as though the mountain peaks are smeared with glowing colours (of minerals).

'The autumn has set in, manifesting its grace on the branches of saptachada trees(sevenleafed banana plant) through the radiance of stars, Sun and Moon and through the sports of excellent elephants.

'From the beauty of autumn manifested in a variety of ways on the clusters of lotuses, touched by the Sun, it seems the goddess of wealth shines and shines effulgently. (The lotus is goddess Laxmi's favourite flower)

'The wind carries the fragrance of saptachada flowers. Attracted by the fragrance, swarms of bees come humming. The pride of the elephants in rut increases.

'The swans have come face to face with chakravaka birds. They have newly arrived. Lovers of lakes, they are shaking the pollen of lotuses on their lovely wide wings and have settled on the sandy bankssporting.

'Goddess Laxmi with her scattered self shines there among the proud elephants, among herds of excited bulls and among streams with clear water.

'The sky is free from clouds. The peacocks have shed their ornamental plumes. They have lost interest in their beloveds. With their glory withdrawn, the peacocks are devoid of happiness and absorbed in the thought of the clouds.

'The forests are delightful to the eyes, as if illuminated by a large number of goldencoloured, finesmelling priyaka branches bent under the heavy loads of flowers.

'Lordly elephants accompanied by their dear female mates, fond of lotus ponds and woods are out to enjoy the sweet smell of the blossoms of saptachada and excited by passion and longing for sexual union are moving slowly.

'Cleared of the black clouds, the sky is shining like a polished weapon. The river waters flow feebly. Winds blowing over white lotuses feel cool. All quarters clear of darkness are shining.



'The bulls surrounded by cows are bellowing with the dust settled on their limbs. Excited by passion they are happy, ready to fight. They look attractive, blessed by the attributes of Autumn.

'The female elephants of good breed, deeply passionate, gather round and follow their intoxicated lord moving slowly through the forest.

'The peacocks have shed their ornamental wear, their plumes. They are moving on the river banks miserably, devoid of high spirit as if they are being taunted by flocks of sarasa birds (who are highspinted and cheerful).

'Excellent elephants in rut, with ichor exuding from their temples trumpet, frightening the ducks and chakravaka birds in the water. Strirring the water in the lakes, ornamented with lotuses, they drink it.

'The swans are full of joy, flocking on the sand banks of rivers crowded with cows where the water is pure and devoid of mud. The rivers are full of sarasa birds and swans who are singing delightfully.

'Suddenly the turbulent sounds of the river waters, waterfalls and thunderclouds have stopped. The peacoks having lost the pleasure of blowing winds lost their excitement. The croaking of frogs is silent.

'With no new rainclouds (in the sky), venomous, multicoloured serpents crawl out of the anthills with emacited (hybernated) bodies, troubled by hunger due to long confinement.

'While the stars appear with the soothing touch of the Moon's beams, this ruddy twilight is quitting the sky on her own.

'The night appears like a lady with a sweet face lit up by the rising Moon, her beautiful eyes opened up by stars, her body draped in the robe of white Moon light.

'Driven by the wind, the lovely sarasa birds, after eating ripened grains from paddy fields happily fly the sky in rows like a garland at great speed.

'With a single swan in sleep night lotuses blooming around it, the water in the big tank appear like the sky free from clouds with the full Moon and clusters of stars scattered. (The swan is the moon, the lotuses the stars and the clean pond the sky).

'Lakshmi, the goddess of wealth (also of autumn) appears decorated with deep wells like an excellent lady with swans as girdles and blooming lotuses and lilies as garlands.

'The whistling of bamboos enhanced by the wind in the early morning, and the bellowing of bulls echoing in the caves supplement each other as it were.

'The river banks shining with fresh white flowers of kasa reeds swayed by the gentle breeze silken look like a lady wrapped in white silk.

'The butterflies glitter around in the forest fearlessly showing their skill in drinking honey, with their backs turned white with the dust of pollen grains from the lotus cups. They follow the wind along with their loved ones in the forest.

'The fresh blooms of night lotuses, the cackle of krauncha birds, fully ripened fields of paddy, the gentle breeze and the bright Moon indicate the coming to an end of the rainy season and setting in of autum.

'Now the riverbrides, displaying their girdles of fish, have slowed down like the gait of sensuous ladies in the early morning, exhausted by sexual pleasures.

'Crowded with chakravaka birds and green moss, and covered with kasa reeds like silken veils, the river banks appear like the face of the bride decorated with designs of green leaves and gorochana tilaka.

'Now Cupid is moving unobstructed showing his power by holding his bow indicating strict punishment to those separated from their beloveds in the forests with bana and asana flowers in bloom and bees humming happily.

'Having showered heavy rains, and filling tanks and rivers, and producing bumper crops on the earth the clouds have disapeared.

'Just as bashful young brides show their loins slowly during their first sexual meet the rivers start showing their sandy banks slowly in autumn.

'O gentle Lakshmana the pure water in the tanks and sweet sounds of flocks of female kurari birds and chakravakas there are splendid.

'The asanas, saptaparna, kovida and bandhujeeva trees and shyama creepers are seen in full bloom on the mountain slopes.

'Lakshmana look at the swans, sarasas, chakravakas and kurara birds scattered all over the river banks.

'O handsome prince the time has come for making expeditions by kings against the enemies waiting for victory.

'O prince this is time for the first expedition (of the year) by kings. I do not find Sugriva making effort in that direction.

'O gentle one, the four months of rainy season are spent without seeing Sita. It is equal to a hundred years for my griefstricken heart.

'Just as a female chakravaka follows the male, Sita followed her husband into this dense Dandaka forest as though it is a pleasuregarden.

'O Lakshmana king Sugriva shows no mercy on one, who is griefstricken, separated from his wife, and banished from the kingdom.

'O gentle one although I am a vanquisher of foes, this evilminded king of monkeys is slighting me because I am away from home, I have lost my kingdom, I am outraged by Ravana, I am miserable and lovesick and I have sought his help.

'The evilminded Sugriva, having fulfilled his objective, does not realise that he has made a promise to me and has reached the time set for the search of Sita.

'Go to Kishkinda and speak (on my behalf ) to that fool, Sugriva, the chief of monkeys who is revelling in habitual sensual pleasures

'He who, having promised to his friend to grant his desire and who, having been obliged, fails to implement the promise, is the lowest on earth.

'(On the other hand) he who honours his promise, whether good or bad, is truly heroic, the best of men.'

'Even the carnivorous animals dislike to eat the body of such ungrateful men who do not help their friends even though they have received help and have achieved their  objective.'

'Surely he wishes to see the form of my bow inlaid with gold bent by me to its full length, looking like a streak of lightning.

'Perhaps he wants once again to hear when enraged in a combat, the dreadful twang of my bow, resembling the peal of a thunderbolt .

'O prince knowing my valour fully welI, and knowing that you are here to help me he is unhesitatingly revelling in sensual pleasures.

'O conqueror of the enemy capital the monkey lord who has achieved his goal does not realise the importance of my mission.

'Having promised (to search for Sita) after the rainy season,Sugriva is not aware that he has (already) spent the four monthsrevelling.

'Sporting with the council of ministers surrounding him, resorting to drinking, he shows no compassion to us feeling wretched with grief.

'O mighty warrior O dear, go to Sugriva and make him aware of the virulence of my anger and tell himः

'The route by which Vali departed, killed by me has not been closed. O Sugriva you ought to abide by the pledge given. Do not follow the path of Vali.

'Vali was killed by me in the battle with a single arrow while I shall kill you now along with your near and dear ones since you have deviated from the truth.'

'O bull among men O hero speak to him that all that is done in time is done well. Hurry up. Ask him to do whatever is good for him as well as for usः

'O lord of monkeys Carry out the promise you made to me, consider it to be eternal dharma. Slain by my arrows, you will see Vali in the abode of the lord of death.'

On seeing Rama, the protector of the human race, wailing Lakshmana of terrific lustre hardened his stand against Sugriva and proceeded, charged with intense anger.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे त्रिंशस्सर्गः  Thus ends the thirtieth sarga of Kishkindakanda of the Holy Ramayana, the first epic, composed by sage Valmiki.