On receiving all the gifts presented by the monkeys, Sugriva permitted them to go happy.

The monkey heroes sent by Sugriva performed the task assigned to them and felt powerful Rama's task has been achieved (a successful beginning has been made).

Cheering Sugriva, the foremost among the monkeys, the mighty Lakshmana said in a humble wayः 'O goodnatured Sugriva if you would like to come to Rama let us depart from Kishkinda.

Hearing the gentle words of Lakshmana, spoken lovingly in that manner and asking him to come along with him, Sugriva was highly pleased.He agreed to go with him and said, 'As you please. I abide by your command'.

Sugriva spoke to Lakshmana endowed with auspicious signs, and thereupon permitted Tara and other women to leave the place.

Sugriva called in the monkeys who deserved audience of the female folk of the royal family. They came forward quickly with folded hands welcoming the heroes.

Then seeing the monkeys who had come there, king Sugriva who was shining like the Sungod asked them to get a palanquin ready at once.

On hearing the king, the monkeys who were quick to act placed a beautiful palanquin in front of him.

Seeing the palanquin placed in front of Sugriva, the chief of the monkeys requested Lakshmana to get in quickly.

With this Sugriva, shining like the Sungod, entered along with Lakshmana the golden palanquin carried by ablebodied monkeys.

With a pale white umbrella over his head, white yaktail fans and sounds of conches and drums, Sugriva set out receiving greetings from monkeys, rejoicing in his royal  glory.

Surrounded by hundreds of monkeys wielding various sharp weapons, Sugriva went forth to the region where Rama resided৷৷

Having reached the place where Rama lived, brilliant Sugriva along with Lakshmana descended from the palanquin.

Thereafter Sugriva followed by the monkeys approached Rama, and stood with folded hands.

Rama was pleased on beholding the great army of monkeys standing, resembling a pond full of lotus buds.

Sugriva touched Rama's feet, bending his head down, and Rama lifted him up and embraced him with love and great regard.

Embracing him, Rama offered him a seat on the ground and saidः

'O best among the heroic monkeys, a king who apportions his time properly towards pursuit of dharma, artha and kama is a hero and deserves to be a king.

'One who neglects dharma and artha and pursues only kama (sensuous enjoyment) is like a man asleep on top of the tree, waking up only to realize that he has fallen down.



'O king of monkeys, slayer of enemies the time to act has arrived. Think of the strategies with your ministers and other monkeys.

On hearing this, Sugriva said to Rama,'O longarmed one the fortune, fame and soverignty of vanaras which was lost has been regained only by your grace.

'O victorious lord he who does not repay the help got through your grace and your brother's is despicable among men.

'O destroyer of enemies hundreds of strong vanara chiefs gathered from all over the earth have reached here.

'O Rama valiant bears of fierce appearance, also golangulas (a variety of monkeys with tails like cows') familiar with the inaccessible fortresses of forest have come. These monkeys are sons of divine beings and gandharvas who can assume any form at will. They are on their way along with their armies.

O scorcher of enemies the vanara troops in hundred thousand crores, ayutas, sanku, arbuda, hundreds of arbudas, madhyas, antyas, samudras and parardhas (100000000000000000), are expected. O king they are residents of Vindhya and Meru mountains, comparable to lord Indra in courage and appear like mountains Meru and Mandara.

'The monkeys who can kill ogre Ravana and his relatives in battle and bring back Maithili will be arriving shortly.

The wise statesman, Rama observing the efforts of Sugriva and his attendants looked like a blooming blue lotus through delight.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे अष्टत्रिंशस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends of thirtyeighth sarga in Kishkindakanda of the first epic, the Holy Ramayana, composed by sage Valmiki.