Sugriva, lord of monkeys, who was supported by a massive army informed Rama, the tiger among men and a crusher of the enemy army

'The vanaras living in my kingdom have come and have settled down. They are strong and huge like elephants and they can assume any form at will.

'Dreadful monkeys, powerful monkeys of fierce valour who resemble demons in form, have arrived.

Powerful vanaras who have earned fame for their valiant deeds in the past, those who are indefatigable and wellknown for their valour having gained preeminence through their efforts and living on several mountains, those who can move on the earth as well as water, crores of them have arrived.

'O Rama,the subduer of foes all of them will follow your command.They are engaged in seeking the wellbeing of elders and can fulfil your wish.

'Dreadful monkeys who resemble demons have arrived along with thousands of fierce fighters.

'O tiger among men announce the proper time for action. This army is at your command. Command them.



On hearing him, Rama, Dasaratha's son, hugged Sugriva with his arms and saidः

'O wise warrior I wish to know whether Vaidehi is alive or not. Let the kingdom of Ravana be found out.

'On locating Vaidehi in the kingdom of Ravana I shall take up proper course of action in conjunction with you.

'O lord of monkeys neither I nor my brother Lakshmana should command the monkeys. You are the right person to do it.

'O king you have understood the task to be performed and, therefore, issue orders without the least hesitation.

'You are my second friend (Lakshmana being the first). You are valiant as well as wise. You are aware of timely action. You are interested in my wellbeing. You are capable. You know my purpose. You are a startegic planner'. (The present purpose is to plan the course of action. That is artha. Sugriva knows this artha very well).

'In response to Rama's desire, Sugriva beckoned a troopleader called Vinata who was wellbuilt and lofty like a mountain. And thundering like a cloud, said to him in the presence of Rama and wise Lakshmanaः

'O foremost of the vanaras march forward with the sons of Moon and Sun, followed by one lakh swift monkeys towards the eastern direction full of mountains, gardens, and forests. Endowed with political wisdom, you are capable of taking right decision in accordance with time and place.

'Search for Sita in the abode of Ravana, on mountain peaks and river banks and in forests.

'Look for Sita in the beautiful places on rivers Bhagirathi, Sarayu, Kausiki and Kalindi, on the great mountains adjacent to river Yamuna, banks of rivers Saraswati, Sindhu, Sona with crystalclear waters, the country of Mahim and Kalamahi adorned with mountains and forests. Proceed to Brahmamala, Videha, Malava, Kasi, Kosala and Maghada with great villages, the country of Pundram, Vanga, the country famous for silk worms and the land with silver caves. (It is the eastern direction of river Saravati between Himavat and Vindhya and not east of Kiskinda)

'Search all over the place looking carefully here and there for Sita the beloved consort of Rama, daughterinlaw of Dasaratha.

'There are people who have taken shelter in the deep pits in the midst of the sea, in deep valleys, mountains, cities and broad peaks of Mandara mountain and forests.All those regions should be thoroughly searched. There are innumerable inhabitants,such as strong cannibals, some who cover their ears, some who have ears extended up to the lips, some with dreadful metallic faces, some swiftmoving, onefooted indestructible beings. There are Kirata tribes of golden complexion and handsome looks whose tuft of hair is set to the sides so that it touches their ears. These Kiratas are Islanddwellers and they eat uncooked fish.They move in waters and are fierce, known as tigerlike men (Naravyagras because half of their body is human and other half is tiger in form). All the shelters of these forestdwellers should be searched well.Those who can be sent by crossing mountains, those who can leap (in air) and those who can swim through waters may be also dispatched.

'Go beyond Java island filled with precious gems. It has seven kingdoms. It is adorned with gold and silver mines in abundance. There is a mountain Sisira (abode of Garuda) beyond Java Island. It touches the sky with its lofty cliffs. Gods and demons visit this mountain. You may look for illustrious Rama's consort in these inaccessible mountains, waterfalls and forests.

'Therefrom reach out to the swiftflowing river Sona which has redcoloured waters. Then crossing the sea which is the abode of Siddhas and Charanas search the different rivers reaching the sea, and the picturesque and wonderful forests to trace the abode of Ravana who has stolen Sita.

'Then you may continue your search in the frightening islands of the sea as well as the sea which roars when stirred up by the wind.

'Demons of huge bodies catch the shadows of passersby in that place as they have been hungry for long and have the permission of Brahma to do so.

'Reach out to the great roaring ocean which looks like a black cloud at the time of dissolution, inhabited by great serpents.Go through the bank of the river, and touch the frightening sea named Lohita of red coloured water.You will see a huge silkcotton tree in that place.

'You would see there a house of Garuda constructed by Visvakarma. It looks like the Kailasa mountain and is adorned with different kinds of gems.

'There are frightening demons called Mandehas of different forms, fearsome as huge mountains hanging down the mountain peaks.

'Those demons keep dropping down in water at the time of Sunrise every day, by the power of Gayatri mantras recited by brahmins scorched by the heat of the Sun. Again and again they keep hanging on to the cliffs.

'You who are unassailable by the enemies, will see the milky ocean appearing like clouds, resembling a pearl necklace with its rows of waves.

'In the midst of that ocean stands a majestic white mountain named Rishaba surrounded by trees filled with silver flowers emitting wonderful fragrance.There is also a lake named Sudarsana with glittering silver lotuses having gleaming golden filaments. Royal swans inhabit these surroundings.

'The deities, called charanas, yakshas and kinneras, also apsarasas keep coming  there to stoll by that lotus pond.

'O monkeys going beyond the milky ocean you will see the seas most dreadful to all creatures.

'Here is born Hayamukha, out of the fastspreading fire of anger of the ocean. Its movable and immovable creatures constitute his food.

'You can hear the sounds of helpless oceanic creatures crying loudly on seeing the burning face of Vadava.

'Thirteen yojanas to the north of this ocean of pure waters is a huge golden mountain called Jatarupasila.

'O monkeys on top of the mountain you will see Ananta, a thousandhooded serpent seated, as bright as the Moon, robed in blue, with large eyes like lotus petals bearing the load of the earth, and revered by all beings.

'Highsouled Ananta's flag is a threeheaded golden palm tree shining on an altar on top of the mountain.

'The flag of Ananta is fixed by the gods in the eastern direction. Beyond that stands the famous golden mountain behind which the sun rises. Its golden peak with a divine altar spread over a hundred yojanas touches heaven.

'The place looks beautiful with salas, palmyras, tamalas and karnikara trees in full bloom. These golden, divine flowers shine like the Sungod.

'There is a huge golden peak called Saumanas of ten yojanas in height spread over a breadth of one yojana.

'When the supreme being, Visnu took his three strides as Lord Vamana, he placed his first foot on this peak and the second on the peak of mount Meru.

'The Sun circumabulates Jambu island and when he arrives at this lofty cliff of the mountain, it takes the northern direction and becomes visible to the world.

'Over there the great ascetics Vaikhanasas and Valakhilyas appear like the radiating Sun.

'The region in front of this mountain is called Sudarsana Island. This island is where the Sun who gives all beings the ability to see rises.

You should search for Ravana and Vaidehi on the peak of that mountain, in the caves, in the forests here and there.

'The early morning twilight appears bright red because of the glow of the golden mountain as well as of the great Sungod.

'Here is the entrance for the earth as well as for all the worlds and since the Sun also rises from this place it is called the eastern direction.

'You may look for Ravana and also for Vaidehi even behind the mountain on the plains and also near the mountain streams and caves all over.

'Beyond, there is no Sun or Moon. Darkness pervades. It is neither accessible nor  visible. It is guarded by the gods.

'You should look for Janaki everywhere -- on the mountains, in the lakes and in the places not indicated by me.

'O chieftains monkeys can go that far. We know not what lies beyond those boundaries where no Sun shines.

'Reaching the mountain behind which the sun rises, look for Vaidehi and the home of Ravana and return by the month's end.

'If you do not report within one month, you will be killed. May you see Maithili and come back after reaching the goal.

'O monkeys go about the beloved quarter (east) of Indra bestowed with differnt kinds of forests and groves. Look out carefully for Rama's beloved Sita, spot her and return, you will live happily.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकांडे चत्वारिंशस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the fortieth sarga in Kishkindakanda of the first epic, the Holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.