Hanuman, the monkey accompanied by Tara and Angada proceeded as instructed by Sugriva in the (South) direction.

He went a long distance with other heroic monkeys, searching in the impenetrable caves of Vindhya mountain. They combed interior places, mountain peaks, fortresses surrounded by rivers, lakes, extensive groves of trees, bushes and thickets.

The heroic monkeys went searching all over the direction for the daughter of Janaka, but in vain.

The unassailable monkeys ate roots and fruits and halted here and there at different places searching for Sita.

They searched in dense forests, interior locations impassable, desolate and terrific, without water, and people.

Having searched all over in the forests and very difficult areas, the fearless, invincible vanaras moved forward, leaving that place and entered another areasearching.

As they marched forward, they entered a location where there were trees devoid of leaves, flowers and fruits and rivers without water and a place where it was difficult to get roots (for food).

There were no buffaloes, no deer, no elephants, tigers or even birds and other wild animals.

There were no medicinal plants, no vines or creepers spreading on the ground.The lotus creepers on the dry ground had shining leaves,beautiful and fragrant blooms devoid of bees.

There was a sage called Kandu who was truthful, outrageous and shorttempered. He observed strict austerities and was rich in penance.

The great sage was enraged because he had lost his sixteenyearold son in the forest.

Cursed by the great righteous sage the entire forest turned barren, unfit to harbour living beings and became devoid of even beasts and birds.

The monkeys searched in the forest regions, in the mountains, rivers and sources of rivers with concentrated attention.

Eager to please Sugriva, the great souls searched in the forest region. Even there they could not find Janaka's daughter and also Ravana who had abducted Sita.

(Then) they noticed a place covered with creepers and bushes. As soon as they entered the dreadful forest, they saw a demon of wicked deeds, unafraid even of gods.

The monkeys beheld the dreadful demon standing firmly like a huge, incomparable mountain in front of them.

Seeing the monkeys, the infuriated demon ran towards them, raising his fist firmly, saying, 'You are all as good as dead, now that I have caught you.'

Mistaking him for Ravana, Angada, Vali's son at once pounced on him and slapped him with his palm.

Struck by Vali's son, the demon vomitting blood from the mouth, fell down on the ground like a mountain, uprooted.

He breathed his last, and the monkeys who won went searching almost all over the mountain caves.

Again they searched the forest and entered another dreadful mountain cave.

Having searched again, the disappointed monkeys collected together under a tree, dejected at heart and sat down in silence.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे अष्टचत्वारिंशस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends of the fortyeighth sarga in Kishkindakanda of the forst epic, the Holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.