After listening to the sweet words of Lakshmana, Hanuman, having done what he had to do felt happy and thought of Sugriva.

The great Sugriva, thinks Hanuman, who had done his duty is likely to acquire his kingdom, because great Rama who would help in the work of Sugriva has also come.'

Hanuman, the best of the monkeys, learned in conversation, felt extremely happy and enquired from Ramaः

'Why have you come with your brother to this dreadful, inaccessible forest surrounding Pampa, full of different varieties of serpents and wild animals?'

Having listened to Hanuman, and urged by Rama, Lakshmana told him about the great Rama, son of Dasaratha.



'He never hated any one nor did any one ever hate him. To all his subjects, he was like another father, the Creator Brahma. And he was generous in giving gifts while performing yajnas (rituals with fire) like Agnistoma.

'Here is his eldest son, popularly known as Rama. He is the protector of all beings and never failed his father's instructions.



'This glorious Rama was followed by his wife, Sita, like the rays of the effulgent Sun follow him to the end of the day.

'I am his younger brother, called Lakshmana. I have accepted the service of this learned, virtuous and grateful man.

'This man who should have lived in comfort and in reverence, one who was worthy of all the wellwishers lost his wealth and was banished into the forest. He is now deprived of his wife kidnapped by an unknown demon who could assume any form at will.

'Diti's son called Danu who had been cursed to live the life of a demon had said that Sugriva, the best among monkeys, would be able to locate her.

'That Valiant Sugriva can spot the demon who has abducted your wife', said Danu and disappeared happily into heaven shining in brilliance.

'I have given a factual account of everything, since you asked me. Now Rama and I have arrived seeking Sugriva's shelter.

'Having earned supreme fame through his munificence in the past, this lord of the world now craves Sugriva's indulgence.

'One whose father was once a protector of dharma, a refuge to all now seeks Sugriva's shelter.

'This righteous Rama who used to lend in the past protection to the whole world and, indeed, a refuge to all, venerable sir, now seeks Sugriva's shelter.

'This Rama for whose grace the subjects were ever bobolden to him now seeks the favour of the Chief of monkeys.

'Famous in all the three worlds, this Rama, who was the firshborn of Dasaratha, endowed with all virtues and ever respected by all the kings of this earth, now seeks shelter of Sugriva, Chief of monkeys.

'Sugriva, lord of monkeys, ought to help Rama who tormented by, and overwhelmed with, grief seeks his favour.'

To Saumitri who was speaking thus in a piteous tone, his eyes filled with tears the eloquent Hanuman repliedः

'It is a matter of great fortune that you who have intelligence, control over your senses and conquered anger have come to see the lord of monkeys who needs instead, to approach you.

'(In fact) seriously offended by his brother Vali who treated him like his enemy and expelled him from the kingdom. He is now abandoned in the forest, his wife hijacked.

'Sugriva, son of the Sungod, along with us will extend all help to you, in your search for Sita.'

Hanuman, having spoken with sweet, gentle words said to the Raghavas, 'We will now go to Sugriva'.

Having offered reverential salutations to Hanuman as per tradition, righteous Lakshmana now spoke to Ramaः

'O Raghava this monkey, son of the Windgod appears pleased as evident from his words. As he is a man of action, take your work as accomplished now.

'It is evident from his words and from his cheerful face that Hanuman is pleased. (I know that) this heroic son of the Windgod will never tell a lie'.

Hanuman, son of the Windgod, endowed with great wisdom carried both the Raghava warriors to the king of monkeys.

Hanuman, who was an elephant among monkeys, gave up the guise of a mendicant, and assuming the form of the monkeys, lifted both the heroes on to his back and proceeded.

The son of the Windgod, the most valiant, the supremely heroic monkey and the one welladmired, having performed his task, felt immensely happy.And with an auspicious feeling, departed for the great mountain (Rishyamuka) along with Rama and Lakshmana.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किंधाकाण्डे चतुर्थस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the fourth sarga of Kishkindakanda of the Holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.