Hanuman, together with the monkeys, Tara and Angada, searched in the impenetrable places and caves of Vindhya.

They also searched near rivers, mountain streams, hill ranges, caves of lions and tigers, in the rock shelters and difficult spots of vast mountains.

They reached the end of the southwest side of the mountain(Vindhya). While they  were still there, the time stipulated for them (to find Sita) had slipped.

The son of the Windgod, Hanuman, searched all over the mountains and caves and woods difficult to access in that southwestern region of the mountain.

Having explored the region surrounded by a network of mountains, Gaja, Gavaksha, Gavaya, Sarabha, Gandhamadana, Mainda and also Dvivida, Sushena, Jambavan, Angada the heir apparent, Tara the forestdweller staying close to one another and Hanuman too not far from the others searched in the southern direction. While they were exploring, they saw the mouth of a large cave called Rikshabilam, which had its mouth open, guarded by a demon.

Overcome with hunger and thirst, the exhausted monkeys noticed a huge cave covered with creepers and bushes, while they were looking around for water.

Just then, the kraunchas, swans, geese and chakravaka drenched in water with their limbs reddened with the pollen of lotuses were fluttering out (of the cave).

The bulls among the monkeys were bewildered when they reached the cave which was difficult to access.

The brilliant host of monkeys experienced both fear and joy to see the cave difficult to enter.

The cave was crowded with creatures of different kinds. It looked like the abode of the king of demons difficult (to enter), dreadful and impenetrable.

Then Hanuman, son of the Windgod who appeared like a huge mountain and knew  about forests spoke to the fellowmonkeysः

'Going round the places covering all mountain ranges in the southern direction, we are spent. But we could not see Maithili.

'From this cave have emerged several birds like sarasas, swans, kraunchas and chakravakas drenched in water. Surely there must be a source of plenty of water or well or a pond. Moreover there are shining( green) trees at the entrance of the cave (suggesting subsoil water).'

On hearing him, the monkeys entered the cave full of darkness. There was no light of the Moon or the Sun. It was a horripilating experience.

The tigers among the monkeys entered the dark cave reverberating with the sounds of lions, beasts and birds.

The monkeys could not fix their eyes anywhere.Their lustre or valour could not help them. They moved like wind uninterrupted and their vision was lost in darkness.

As the elephantlike monkeys entered the cave quickly, they saw bright light and an excellent delightful place.

Holding one another's hands, they went in for a distance of one yojana inside the cave that was densely covered with several kinds of trees.

Having nearly lost their senses (without water to drink), the thirsty and bewildered monkeys were desperate for water.They wandered in the cave without feeling lazy for some time.

Exhausted and enfeebled, they saw with dejected faces a gleam of light at a time when they were desparate.

Having reached inside the cave the monkeys saw a forest shining like blazing fire, dispelling the surrounding darkness. There they noticed sala, tala, tamala, punnaga, vanjjula, dhava, champaka, and naga trees. They also saw blossoming plants of Karnikara, bunches of beautiful golden flowers and tender redcoloured leaves.They saw wonderful trees with creepers on top entwining them, and ornamented with gold (like golden fruits), radiant like the dazzling rising Sun. There were altars encrusted with precious sapphire and vaidurya. The golden trees were shining bright. There were lotus creepers looking like sapphire and vaidurya.The ponds were filled with golden lotuses and were surrounded by birds.

There they saw golden fishes and huge tortoises in the pellucid water of the tank filled with lotus creepers.

The vanaras beheld highrise palaces built with gold and silver. The windows fixed on the roof were golden, shaped like cow's eye with lattices of pearls. They also saw best of houses built in gold, silver and clay, decorated with precious gems including vaidurya.

They saw trees bright like corals in full bloom and ripe fruits. Golden bees were found hovering around making all kinds of honey.

They saw all over rich collections of beds, couches and highly valuable vehicles, decorated beautifully with gems and gold.They also saw a large collection of shining utensils made of gold, silver and bronze.

There they noticed a wonderful collection of incense and sandal, tasty and pure eatables, roots and fruits

(They found) excellent drinks and many kinds of honey, wonderful collections of clothes, colourful blankets and heaps of animal skin.

The monkeys marked here and there a collection of gold, glittering like blazing fire.

While searching here and there in the cave, the strong and powerful monkeys discovered a woman not far from there.

She was an ascetic in bark robes and deer skin blazing with lustre, restrained in her food. The monkeys got very frightened.

The amazed monkeys stopped there. Hanuman enquired, 'Who are you? Whose cave is this'?

Then Hanuman who was of the size of a mountain greeted the old lady with folded hands and enquired her 'Who are you? To whom does this mansion, this cave and these gems belong?'  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे पञ्चाशस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends of fiftieth sarga in Kishkindakanda of the first epic of the Holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.