After the monkey leaders had taken rest, the noble ascetic with undiverted attention said these wordsः

'O monkeys if you have been relieved of your fatigue after eating fruits, now tell me about yourself, if you think it can be told. I want to hear.

When Hanuman, son of the Windgod, heard her, he started narrating frankly and truthfully.

'Rama, son of Dasaratha, a prosperous king of all the worlds, comparable to Indra and Varuna came to the Dandaka forest along with his brother Laksmana and wife Vaidehi. Ravana abducted his wife from Janasthana.



'We along with the dreadful monkeys are sent with Angada as our chief to the southern direction, guarded by Yama and inhabited by sage Agasti. We are commanded to search Sita, princess of Videha and also the abode of the demon Ravana who assumes any form at his free will.



'We were all exhausted, lost in thought and worried, unable to cross this deep ocean of sorrow. We did not know how to proceed.

'Then while we were looking around we saw this cave concealed by trees and vines, with darkness spread all over.

'Drenched in water the swans, kuraras, and sarasas were seen emerging with water dripping from thier wings.

'I suggested to the fellowmonkeys to enter this cave, inferring that there would be water and all of them came to the same conclusion.

'We said, 'let us enter', since we were in a hurry to carry out our king's orders.Then we jumped in, holding one another's hand.

'Vexed and starved, we entered this grotto shrouded in darkness.This is our task and we reached here (in the process).

'You have given us roots and fruits out of hospitality and we have been taken them driven by hunger and thirst.

'We were dying from hunger when you saved us. Tell us what the monkeys can do to repay your debt?'.

To the leaders among the monkeys, knowers of dharma, who said this Svayamprabha repliedः

'I am very much pleased with all of you, smart monkeys. As I am engaged in the practice of righteousness, I do not need your services.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे द्विपञ्चाशस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the fiftysecond sarga in Kishkindakanda of the first epic, the Holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.