To the auspicious words of the righteous, blameless hermitess Hanuman repliedः

'You are a righteous lady. You have given us refuge. Now in moving about the cave we have exceeded the time limit given by Sugriva.'



'O righteous lady we have a great task waiting. We are afraid of Sugriva as we could not accomplish our objective by staying here. Save us.'

To the words of Hanuman the ascetic replied, 'I consider it difficult for any one who enters here to go back alive.'

'I will help all monkeys out of this cave by virtue of my power of asceticism duly practised.



Happy at the prospect of getting out (of the cave) they all not only closed their eyes but also covered them with their delicate fingers.

Then the great monkeys, faces covered with their hands, emerged from the cave in a moment.

The righteous hermitess released all the monkeys out of that difficult situation and said these words of consolationः

'This Vindhya mountain has a rich collection of trees and bushes. This is Prasravana hill and this is the great ocean.O monkeys. Good luck to you. (Now) I am going back home'. Having said so, Svayamprabha entered the splendid cave.

Then the monkeys saw the boundless, dreary ocean roaring wild with its terrific waves spread all over.

While they were ransacking the impassable mountain created with the magical powers of Maya, the time limit of one month set by the king was over.

Then the highsoul monkeys reached the hill adjacent to Vindhya mountain on which trees were in full bloom.They sat there, lost in thought.

Alarmed at the thought (of transgression of time limit), the monkeys kept looking at the tree tops entwined with a hundred oreepers heavily loaded with the flowers of spring.

Having realised (looking at the flowers) that spring has set in and they have exceeded the time limit, they all fell down on the ground.

Coming to a conclusion after due deliberation Angada, heir apparent, profoundly wise, endowed with sturdy and broad shoulders like those of a lion or a bull, spoke in a sweet voice to the elderly, respectable monkeys, dwellers of the forestः

'O monkeys don't you realize that all of us have come here at the command of the monkey king, and while we were in the cave a whole month has gone by?

'We started our journey in the month of Ashvayuja with a certain time limit. That has exceeded. What is the future course of action?



'You are all celebrated for bravery and incomparable in your activities. You have followed me in obedience to the orders of the tawnyeyed Sugriva.

'We should be killed since we have failed to achieve the objective (of finding Sita). There is no doubt about it. Who can live in peace without executing the orders of the king?

'Now that the time limit fixed by Sugriva has expired, the right thing to do for the monkeys is to fast unto death.

'By nature Sugriva is harsh, and being a king now, he will not forgive us who are real offenders and have not done the task assigned.



'Surely the king will torture us by awarding death sentence in a singular manner when we go back. It is better for us to meet death here itself.

'I was not installed as heir apparent by Sugriva. I was made crowned prince by king Rama, the king of the people who never hurts others.

'The Monkeyking nursed bitter enmity against me even earlier. Now seeing my lapse, he will decidedly inflict severe punishment on me.

'I do not want my friends to see my calamity, my death. I shall sit here on the sacred shores of this ocean and await my death'.

Hearing the young heir apparent thus speaking, the best of the monkeys kindly respondedः

'By nature Sugriva is harsh. Rama is devoted to his wife. Therefore, if Sugriva sees that we have not found Vaidehi and have returned (without fulfilling the mission) he will award death sentence to us in order to please Rama.There is no doubt.

'Those who have failed in their mission, being offenders should not go to meet the king. Offenders are not forgiven. Here itself we will search for Sita and if we are able to know her whereabouts we will go back. Or else we will go to the abode of Yama'.

'On hearing the words of the frightened monkeys, Tara said, 'Enough of this sorrow. If it pleases you, we will all go to the cave and reside there' ''

'This cave built by magic is inaccessible. It has a number of trees, water, eatables and drinks. (If we live here) we need not be afraid of even Indra, the breaker of enemy citadels or even of Rama or also of the king of monkeys'.

All the monkeys agreed to the favourable suggestion of Tara which was acceptable to Angada. 'A plan may be made in such a way by which we will not be killed by the king. Our strategy should be delinked from the conditions laid down by the king. Let us not face punishment' said the monkeys.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे त्रिपञ्चाशस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the fiftythird sarga in Kishkindakanda of the first epic, the Holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.