While the monkeys were preparing to fast unto death on the plateau of the mountain, Sampati, the prosperous king of vultures, the longlived elder brother of Jatayu widely known for his strength, appeared there.

Coming out of the cave of the great mount Vindhya, Sampati was glad to see the monkeys seated there and said to himselfः

'Destiny rules the world of men in accordance with a divine arrangement. Or else, it would not have brought me food after a long time (of fasting)'. (The monkeys are food for Sampati)'

Looking at them, the vulture continued, 'I will eat these monkeys one after the other as and when they die'.

Hearing the words of the vulture greedily waiting for food, deeply dejected Angada spoke to Hanumanः

'See, Yama, son of Vaivasvata, has arrived here in person to destroy the monkeys in the name of Sita. (Sita became the direct agent for causing the destruction of monkeys).

'Rama's task has not been performed. Sugriva's order has not been excuted. And (now) suddenly this calamity has overtaken the monkeys unawares.

'We have heard in detail about the task accomplished by Jatayu, the king of vultures, in order to please Sita, the princess of Videha.



'Bound by friendship and compassion each one helps the other. In fact, Jatayu did this by giving up his life on his own, for the sake of Rama.

'Jatayu, the knower of dharma, has laid down his life for the wellbeing of Rama. We are exhausted in the process of helping Rama. We have lost hope of our lives after entering these forests. Yet we have failed to find the princess from Mithila.

'The king of vultures was slain by Ravana in a combat. He attained supreme status. He had no fear for Sugriva (as we have).

'The survival of monkeys has become doubtful due to the death of Jatayu, death of king Dasaratha and the abduction of the princess from Videha.

'The exile of Rama and Lakshmana into the forest along with Sita, so also the death of Vali and of the demons in the hands of Rama due to his anger are all evil  consequences of a boon granted to Kaikeyi.'

The wise king of vultures was shaken up mentally on seeing the monkeys lying on the ground and hearing the unhappy narration of Angada.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आतिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे षटपञ्चाशस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the fiftysixth sarga in Kishkindakanda of the first epic, the Holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.