Sampati bathed and offered libations to Jatayu. Then all the monkeys sat round him on the beautiful mountain.

Angada sat near Sampati surrounded by all monkeys. Sampati who had gained confidence spoke to Angada once again joyously.

'O monkeys I shall tell you in detail how I came to know the princess from Mithila. Listen quietly with rapt attentionः

Scorched by the rays of the Sun, I was burnt totally and fell on the peak of this mount Vindhya years ago.



'Then I looked at the oceans, the mountains, rivers, lakes, forests and all locations and my memory returned gradually.

'I came to know then that this place is inhabited by flocks of happy birds and full of many caves and mountain peaks. This is mount Vindhya on the shore of the southern ocean.

'There was a hermitage nearby, where a revered sage, who was even worshpped by gods lived. His name was Nishakara. He did rigorous penance here.

'O righteous monkeys after the death of sage Nishakara eight thousand years have passed. And I have been living here.

'I descended down slowly from the high rugged peak of the Vindhya mountain with great difficulty to the plain land bristling with sharp, harsh darbha grass.

'Eager to see the great sage I reached the place with much difficulty. I and my brother Jatayu had approached him many a time earlier.

'In the vicinity of that hermitage there was no tree without flowers or fruits and fragrant was the breeze that blew around.

'On reaching the sacred hermitage, I stood and waited under a tree for the audience of the divine sage Nishakara.



'He was followed by bears, deer, tigers, lions, elephants and snakes just as living beings follow their creator.

'Just as the army including feudatories recede, when the king comes, all those creatures repaired to their dens when they knew the arrival of the sage at the hermitage.

The sage who entered the hermitage came out again within a moment on seeing me and enquired about me affectionatelyः

'O gentle one seeing your body devoid of hair I can understood that your wings have been burnt and your body bruised.

'You are the king among vultures equal to wind in speed.I had seen both the brothers earlier and both of you could change your form at will.



'What disease has affected you? Why are your wings dropped down? Who punished you in this way? Tell me.'  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे षष्टितमस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the sixtieth sarga in Kishkindakanda of the first epic, the Holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.