On hearing the words of Rama in deep distress, the monkey replied to him with folded hands, his throat choked with tearsः

'I do not have any knowledge of this sinful demon's dwelling , his capability, his valour or his clan or his despicable lineage.

'O subduer of enemies, give up sorrow. I promise I will make necessary effort so that you will obtain the princess from Mithila.

'With all my capability I will kill Ravana and his clan. Thus I will be able to satisfy you soon with my efforts.

'Give up despair. It is enough. Be patient. Maintain your natural disposition.It is unworthy of men like you to entertain such frivolus thoughts?

'Separated from my wife, I, too, am afflicted with deep grief. But I do not brood, I do  not lose patience.

'I am an ordinary monkey born. Even then, I do not brood over my wife. You are highsouled, humble and patient. Why do you grieve?

'Restrain the flow of your tears. Be patient. Men (like you) endowed with equilibrium and dignity and patience ought not to leave their composure.

'In times of grief or loss of wealth or at the hour of death, one who is patient does not abandon his wisdom, he does not despair.

A man who is unwise and distraught only gets sunk in grief like a heavily loaded boat (sinks) in water.

'I implore you with folded palms on account of our friendship to show manliness. You should not give in to grief.

'There is no happiness for those who give way to sorrow. Their brilliance is dimmed. Therefore, you ought not grieve.

'Even the chances of survival are doubtful for a man who is overpowered by sorrow. Give up sorrow and have patience, O king

'Out of friendly concern I offer my opinion in your interest. I am not competent to advise you. Respecting my friendship, you should never yield to grief.'

Consoled by the sweet words of Sugriva, Rama wiped his face filled with tears by the hem of his upper cloth.

When lord Rama, the scion of the Kakutstha race was comforted by these words of Sugriva, he came to his senses, and clasping him saidः

'O Sugriva you have done what a friend should have done in a befitting manner with your sweet words and good wishes.

'O friend you have guided me back to my senses thus. It is difficult to find a friend like you specially at this time.

'Indeed, you must make effort to trace the princess from Mithila and the evilminded,  fierce demon Ravana.

'Now tell me about my duty without any hesitation. I assure you that your desire will be fulfilled, just as seeds sown in a fertile land with timely rains bear fruit.

'O tiger amongst monkeys accept my words uttered out of injured honour in their true sense.

'I have never uttered a false word earlier nor will I do it in future. This is my promise. I swear by truth alone.'

Sugriva and his counsellors felt glad on hearing Rama's words, particularly the assurance given by him.

Man and monkey then met privately and shared the weal and woe of one another.

Wise Sugriva, chief of monkeys, heard the words of the magnanimous Rama, a bull  among men. He felt glad at heart thinking that his task has been achieved.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे सप्तमस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the seventh sarga of Kishkindakanda of the Holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by the sage Valmiki.