Sugriva, the monkey was very pleased with Rama's words and said to him in front of Lakshmanaः

'Since one like you endowed with all virtues has become my friend I am (now) worthy of grace of the gods in all respects. There is no doubt.

'O Rama, my sinless Lord, it is possible to attain even the kingdom of the gods with your help, what to speak of my own kingdom?

'O Rama, since you, born in Raghava dynasty, have become my friend with fire as witness, I have become equally honourable among my relatives and friends.

'You will come to know slowly that I am also a friend worthy of you.It is not proper for me to speak of my qualities( flatter myself).

'The affection of exalted souls is exceedingly stable like the patience of selfcontrolled and wellcomposed men like you.

'Good friends consider(valuables such as) silver or gold, clothes or ornaments of worldly wealth indivisible.

'Whether rich or poor, afflicted or happy, flawless or guilty, a friend is the ultimate refuge to a friend.

'One will not hesitate to sacrifice wealth or happiness or even life for the sake of a friend like you.'

As wise Lakshmana, brilliant like Indra stood witness, Rama said, 'it is true as you say' to Sugriva who spoke pleasing words.

With mighty Rama and Lakshmana standing by, Sugriva cast his eyes eagerly all round the forest.

Then the chief of monkeys saw a sala tree looking lovely with tender leaves and flowers graced by bees.

Sugriva cut a branch of the beautifully blossomed sala tree with plenty of leaves, spread it (on the ground) and squatted along with Rama.

Thereafter Hanuman also broke a branch of the sala tree and seated Lakshmana on it.

Now Rama, seated comfortably on the best of mountains overgrown with trees full of flowers and fruits, appeared tranguil like an ocean. Extremely delighted and excited, Sugriva spoke to Rama words that got mixed up with softness and sweetness out of loveः

'I am sadly roaming here in the great Rishyamuka mountain, my wife stolen, offended by my brother and frightened.

'O Rama my brother is my enemy. Deceived and threatened by him, I live in the forest stricken with fear and utterly confused.

'O great warrior who can frighten all the worlds scared of Vali, I feel helpless like an orphan to whom you ought to extend your grace.'

Thus spoken to, the glorious Rama, lover of righteousness who knew his duty, replied to Sugriva with a smile on his faceः

'While a friend is known for his help, an enemy is known for his offensiveness. I will this very day kill the one who wrested your wife.

'Here are my highspeed, winged arrows glowing like fierce fire, born out of Kartikeya's bed of reeds.They are smooth and welljointed, decked with gold, comparable in strength to great Indra's thunderbolt, very sharp with pointed tips looking like angry serpents.

'Vali who calls himself your brother is your enemy and a doer of wrong deeds. You will see him crushed, like a mountain shattered, by my arrows.'

On hearing Rama's words, Sugriva, chief of the army of monkeys experienced immeasurable happiness and exclaimed, 'you're great, you're great.'

'Rama I am overwhelmed with sorrow. You are the refuge of the distressed. As you are a friend I ventilate all my grief to you.

'I value your hand of friendship extended to me, with fire as witness more than my very life. I, on my own, offer my pledge of friendship.



His vision blurred, words choked with tears he was unable to speak further.

Quickly Sugriva controlled his tears streaming fast like the rushing river, with patience, Rama seated in front.

Effulgent Sugriva controlled his tears, wiped his bright eyes, took deep breath and said to Ramaः

'O Rama I was subjected to the harsh words of powerful Vali in the past when he uprooted me from the kingdom and threw me out.

'I was robbed of my wife who is dearer than my own life. All my friends were rounded up and imprisoned.

'O Rama this evilminded one made several attempts to kill me. The monkeys he sent to kill me were themselves killed.

'It is because of suspicion that I did not approach you. Every one is scared when there is ample reason to fear.

'Only Hanuman and other chiefs are helping me. Therefore, I am surviving in spite of all difficulties.

'These monkeys out of love for me keep me protected from all sides. They go out with me when it is necessary and stay back whenever I stop (in order to guard me).

'O Rama I tell you (my story) briefly. It is not necessary to go into details. My elder brother Vali, who is known for his prowess, is my enemy.

'My sorrow will go only with his death. My happiness and my life are also subject to his destruction.

'This what I had to tell you out of sorrow. This is how my sorrow will end. In joy and in sorrow your friend is your refuge.

After hearing Sugriva, Rama said 'I wish to know the actual cause of this enmity.

'On hearing the cause of your enmity and considering your strength and weakness, I will take steps to make you happy.

'On hearing about your humiliation I feel highly agitated at heart. I feel very much angry and restless like the water in rainy season.

'Tell me freely and cheerfully before I string the bow. Your enemy will be destroyed as soon as I release my arrow.'

When the great Rama said this, Sugriva with all the four monkeys felt immeasurably glad.

With a smile on his face, Sugriva started narrating to Lakshmana's elder brother the facts about the cause of his enmity (with Vali).  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे अष्टमस्सर्गः  Thus ends the eighth sarga of Kishkindakanda of the Holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.