'My elder brother called Vali, capable of exterminating enemies was always highly regarded by my father and me.



'I served him obediently like a servant while he ruled over the great ancestral kingdom inherited by him.

'Dundubhi's eldest son Mayabi was a mighty demon. He developed bitter enmity with Vali for the sake of a woman.

'One midnight when all were asleep, he (Mayabi) came to the entrance of Kishkinda screaming angrily and bellowing at Vali, challenging him to a duel.

' My brother Vali, who was asleep could not tolerate the frightful sound and jumped  out of bed hastily.

'Enraged, he came out to kill the powerful demon even though I with the womenfolk (of the harem) tried to prevent him.

'That mighty warrior(Vali) came out, pushing aside all the womenfolk. I too followed him due to my affection towards him.

'On seeing my brother and me from a distance, the demon took to his heels scared.

'Frightened, he ran. We too chased him running faster. As the Moon was rising the path was welllit.

'The demon entered into a hole (cave) covered with a heap of grass, difficult, therefore, of access. Both of us reached there and took position.

'Seeing the enemy entering the cave, Vali became wrathful and his senses were terribly disturbed.He said to meः

'O Sugriva wait here at the entrance of the cave and be on your alert until I enter this hole and kill the enemy'.

'On hearing him, I begged the scorcher of enemies (Vali) that I would follow him, but he made me swear on his feet and entered the cave.



'Thinking him dead, I became agitated because of my love for him. My mind began to apprehend his death since I had not seen my brother for long.



'I heard the roaring voices of the demons and not the yelling of my brother engaged in the duel.

'O friend by those signs I understood that my brother was killed and concluding that way I blocked the entrance of the cave with a rock of the size of a mountain and offered oblations to my brother and came to Kishkinda. I intended to hide the fact of Vali's death. But the ministers came to know the truth with their efforts.

'Then all the ministers assembled together and consecrated me. While I was ruling the kingdom lawfully, Vali, the monkey came back after killing the enemy demon.

'Seeing me on the throne, Vali became angry and his eyes turned red. He imprisoned  my ministers and spoke to me harshly.

'O Rama even though I was capable of restraining the sinner, my intellect did not let me do so out of respect for my brother.

'When my brother came back to the town after killing the enemy, I offered as usual my salutations to him. But he did not bless me wholeheartedly.

'O lord I bowed at his feet with my crown in total submission. Even then Vali was not pleased a bit.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे नवमस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the ninth sarga of Kishkindakanda of the Holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.