King Ravana, tormentor of enemies, having thus spoken to Mythili commanded the demonesses and departed.

As the demon king left for his abode all the demonesses of hideous looks rushed towards Sita and crowded around her.

The demonesses, overcome with anger, approached Sita and harshly saidः

'O Sita don't you think it is a privilege to be the wife of the highsouled, tennecked Ravana, who is the distinguished king of a high family of sage Paulastya?

Then Ekajata, a shedemon of hideous looks, eyes red with anger and a belly of the size of the palm said to Sitaः

'The mindborn son of Brahma is well known as Paulastya. He was the fourth among the six Prajapatis (Maricha, Atri, Angira, Pulastya, Plaha, Kratu).

'This glorious mindborn sage Pulastya's son is the famous Vishrava who, in glory and splendour was equal to Prajapatis.

'O largeeyes lady to become the wife of the lord of demons is a stroke of good luck. You deserve to be one. O lady of beautiful limbs why don't you accept his proposal?'

Then an ogress called Harijata said this in anger, her cateyes rollingः

'You ought to be the wife of the lord of ogres who has vanquished thirty three crores of gods including Indra, their king.'

Then an ogress named Praghasa, overwhelmed with anger, deriding Sita said these terrible wordsः

'Why don't you wish to be the wife of such a mighty and powerful king, a valiant hero who has never beaten a retreat in war?

'Even renouncing his highly respectable, favourite wife among all, mighty Ravana is prepared to accept you.

'Ravana is prepared to abandon a thousand wives in his prosperous harem decorated with all kinds of gems in order to accept you.'

Another ogress called Vikata said, ' Know that he who has often defeated gods in war and has vanquished nagas, gandharvas and demons has come to you (seeking your favour)'.

'O foolish woman why don't you seek the wifehood of a glorious king of demons who has abundance of wealth?'

Then an ogress called Durmukhi said, 'O lady of long sideglances why don't you yield to him, afraid of whom the Sun scorches not and strong winds blow not?

'O lady of beautiful brows why don't you make up your mind to accept the king of kings, afraid of whom the trees rain flowers, the mountains and clouds release water at his will? Ravana is the king of the southwest, direction Why don't you wish to be his wife?

'O beautiful lady with a gentle smile we have tendered good advice to you wishing you well. Accept this advice or else you may not be alive.'  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे त्रयोविंशस्सर्गः।  Thus ends the twentythird sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.