Then the hideous ogresses approached Sita and spoke these harsh words in an unbecoming mannerः

'O Sita why don't you agree to dwell in Ravana's inner apartment furnished with fine bedsteads, and which is delightful?

'You are a woman, wife of Rama, an ordinary mortal you are holding in high esteem. Withdraw your mind from Rama or else you will not survive.

"Accept Ravana as your husband and after uniting with him enjoy all the pleasures of the three worlds.

'O charming lady you have an irreproachable beauty and grace. Why do you think of human Rama only who has been dethroned from the kingdom. He is only a human being who is unsuccessful and distressful.'

Hearing the words of the ogresses, Sita with eyes like lotus petals full of tears replied this wayः

"All of you joined together and spoke such words that are not acceptable to the world. Your sinful words of advice do not appeal to me.

' A human being ought not to become wife of a demon. Devour me if you want. I refuse to accept your advice.'

'Dejected or dethroned from the kingdom, Rama is my lawful husband. I will ever remain devoted to Rama as Suvarchala, wife of the Sungod is to him.

'I am steadfast (in love) to my husband Rama, the foremost of the Ikshvaku family in the same manner as noble Sachi to Indra, Arundhati to Vasistha, Rohini to the Moon, Lopamudra to Agastya, Sukanya to sage Chyavana, Savitri to Satyavan, Srimati to Kapilamuni Madayanti to Soudasu, Kesini to king Sagara and Bhima's daughter Damayanti to her lord Nala, (the king of Nishadas)'.

Hearing the reply of Sita, the ogresses ordered by Ravana and overtaken by anger again began to threaten Sita using harsh words.

Hanuman who kept himself concealed on the simsupa tree speechlessly listened to the ogresses threatening Sita.

Sita was trembling in fear. The enraged ogresses went on licking their lips hanging, again and again.

The enraged ogresses immediately picked up the axes and rose up saying, 'she is unfit to have the demon king, Ravana as her husband'.

As the charming Sita was threatened by the fierce ogresses, she moved towards the simsupa tree with eyes full of tears.

Then the largeeyed Sita, drowned in sorrow surrounded by the ogresses went near the simsupa tree and stood there.

The ogresses started intimidating Sita who was dressed in soiled clothes and emaciated with a dejected look on her face.

Then a dark ogress called Vinata with a terryfying look, loathsome appearance and a large sunken belly said to Sitaः

'O Sita you have shown your love for your husband to this extent. It is enough. O auspicious lady anything carried to excess leads to adversity.

"O Mythili I beseech you (to oblige Ravana). You have discharged your duty as a human being. Be happy. But you should also heed my advice which is, after all, salutary.

'Accept as your husband the demon king Ravana, courageous and handsome like Indra, king of the gods generous, sacrificing and pleasing.

'Leave the helpless human Rama and seek Ravana's refuge. O Vaidehi, using the heavenly unguents and adorned with imposing ornaments from now on, be the queen of all people.

O beautiful Sita Just like Swaha, queen to the Firegod and Sachi to Indra, accept Ravana. Why are you still thinking of Rama who is helpless and whose life span is coming to an end soon.

'If you do not heed our words of advice, all of us will eat you at this very moment.'

Now Vikata another ogress with hanging breasts raised her fist up in anger and roared at Sita.

O wicked Mythili! we have tolerated many unpleasant words uttered by you due to our kindness and mildness..

'O Mythili you have heeded not our good and timely advice tendered in your interest. You have been brought to the other shore of the ocean and to the inner chambers of Ravana which is very difficult for others to access.

'You are in Ravana's house, wellguarded by us. It is not possible even for Indra, destroyer of citadels, to come to your rescue (let alone Rama).

'Mythili, act according to our advice. I am your wellwisher. Give up sorrow and stop shedding useless tears.

'O Sita offer your love to Ravana, adore him and be happy. Give up this continuous dejection. Enjoy all pleasures along with the king of demons.

'O timid Sita know that youth of women is fleeting and transient. Before it is over, enjoy all kinds of pleasures.

'O lady of intoxicating eyes range in the company of the demon king, the delightful gardens and mountain ranges filled with gardens.

'O beautiful Sita seven thousand ogresses will be at your beck and call. (Therefore) accept Ravana, the lord of all ogres as your husband.

'O Mythili if you heed not my words of advice, I will pluck out your heart and eat it up'.

Next spoke a fiercelooking ogress called Chandodari, overcome with anger taking up a huge trident and rotating.

'I have developed a morbid desire to feast upon this woman with eyes flashing like doe's, whose breasts heave with stress and fear after she was abducted by Ravana.

'I thought of feasting on your spleen, liver, heart, all the joints, head and intestines.'

Next spoke an ogress called Praghasa, saying 'Why not we twist and squeeze the neck of this heartless lady. Why are you sitting idle still? Come on.'

'Thereafter we will announce that such a human being is dead. Then Ravana will simply say 'eat her up'. There is no doubt .'

Then an ogress called Ajamukhi said, 'Let her body be cut into lumps of equal pieces.

'We shall share them. I do not like disputes in this regard. Go swiftly and get drinks and food to lick. Let the accompanying dishes of all variety and quality be brought.'

Then an ogress called Surpanakha said, 'I too like the proposal of Ajamukhi.'

'Get the wine quickly, destroyer of all sorrows. After relishing the human flesh we will start Nikumbhila dance.'

Threatened by the ogresses in that manner, Sita who was like the daughter of a god, cried aloud.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे चतुर्विंशस्सर्गः।  Thus ends the twentyfourth sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.