On hearing the many harsh words of dire threat by the ugly ogresses, the daughter of Janaka wept.

In reply to the ogresses who thus spoke, noble Vaidehi, terribly frightened, said in a voice choked with tears.

'A human ought not to become the wife of a demon. You can eat me up. I will not follow your advice.'

Surrounded by the ogresses, distressed Sita, who was like the daughter of a divine, did not get any solace.

'Like a doe that strayed from the herd in the forest and tormented by wolves around, Sita had withdrawn into herself all her limbs through fear, she was trembling excessively.

Laying hold on a large blossoming branch of the Ashoka tree, Sita thought of her husband with a broken heart.

Her large breasts bathed with the flow of tears, she continued to brood over her plight and found no end to it.

Trembling like a banana tree uprooted by the stormy wind, Sita who was seized with fear of the ogresses looked pale and desperate.

The long, luxuriant braid of hair of the trembling Sita waving (in the wind), appeared like a crawling female serpent.

The distressed Mythili, her consciousness drowned in grief, sighing, shed streams of tears.

'The bright, beautiful Sita began to wail, alas, "Rama alas, Lakshmana alas, my motherinlaw, Kausalya alas, Sumitra

'There is a famous popular saying among the learned that untimely death is not  possible either for a woman or a man.It is true that I am living in this miserable condition, deprived of Rama's company and tormented by these cruel ogresses here. Living in such conditions even for a moment is impossible. But nobody dies an untimely death.

'I am a woman of low merit, a wretched woman, an orphan. I will be ruined like the loaded boat that gets hit in the midst of the ocean by the stormy wind.

'Unable to find my husband and seized by these ogresses, I am collapsing on account of grief like a riverbank under the current of water.

'Blessed are those who are in touch with my husband with eyes like lotus petals, whose walk is majestic like a lion's, who has a sense of gratitude and is pleasing in words.

'Separated from Rama endowed with selfknowledge, it is impossible for me to live like one who has drunk venom.

'I do not know what great sin I have committed in my past life for which I experience this terrific, cruel affliction?

'I long to give up my life, afflicted with great grief, as I, wellguarded by these ogresses, have no hope to reach Rama.

'Fie upon this human life. Fie upon this dependence. What a pitiable situation I am placed in. It is not possible for me, a human, to give up life at my free will.'  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे पञ्चविंशस्सर्गः।  Thus ends the twentyfifth sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.