The young daughter of king Janaka thus speaking, began to cry, her face bent down.

Bewildered or distracted or intoxicated, this young lady wailed, wallowing round on the ground like a young female horseः

When Rama was engaged (in deer hunt) and I was screaming, I was brought forcibly by Ravana who can assume any form at his will.

"Having fallen under the clutches of the dreadful demonesses and threatened by them, I am so full of woes and worries that I don't want to live.

"In the absence of the great charioteer Rama, of what use is my living in the midst of ogresses? I need no wealth, no ornaments.

"It may be, that my heart is made of stone or it has no age or death since it does not riven even with grief.

"I am preserving this sinful life like this though separated from Rama. Fie on me, for this wretched, infidel life

"How can I have interest in any kind of pleasure without my sweettongued husband, the lord of the whole earth extending up to the ocean.

"I will give up my body. Break me into pieces or eat me up. I cannot bear the sorrow of separation from my dear Rama any longer.

"I will not even touch that vile nightranger Ravana with my left foot. What to speak of loving him.

'As Ravana has no heart, he pleads to gain me. He is aware of neither his own self nor his family.

"Even if I am cut, broken to pieces or burnt in glowing fire, I will not accept Ravana. Why do you shout for so long?

"Rama is renowned, wise, grateful and kindly. It is due to my misfortune that he has turned pitiless to me. There is no doubt.

"He who destroyed fourteen thousand demons singlehanded has not come to protect me. I do not know why.

"Rama, my husband, for sure, is capable of killing in battle this Ravana who has held me captive and who is a demon of inferior valour.

"Why is Rama who killed Viradha, a bull among demons, in Dandaka forest in the fight not coming to rescue me?

"This Lanka in the middle of the ocean is unassailable. But there is nothing which can resist the arrows of Rama.

"What may be the reason that my loving husband, Rama who is highly powerful has not reached this place to which I was abducted by the demon.

"The elder brother of Lakshamana does not know that I am here. Or, I'm afraid, the glorious Rama knows and yet tolerates such an outrageous act.

"Even the king of vultures knows I was borne away. He could have informed Rama. But he has also been thrashed down on the earth by Ravana in the fight.

"Though old, Jatayu did a great help to me by resisting Ravana in the duel and advancing (to confront him.).

"Had only Raghava known that I was here he would have freed this world of demons with his anger.

"Had Rama known that I am in Lanka he would have blown up this city, dried up the ocean and destroyed the name and fame of the mean Ravana.

"Like me weeping, the cry of ogresses with lost husbands will be heard in every house in Lanka. There is no doubt.

"If only Lakshmana and Rama in their quest for Lanka reach here, it is not possible within their sight for the enemy to survive even a moment.

"Very soon this Lanka will be enveloped with smoke from funeral pyres and thronged with flocks of vultures moving in circles. It will be like a burial ground.

"Your bad behaviour forebodes illluck for you.I shall have my desire fulfilled in a short time.

"Inauspicious signs are seen here in Lanka. In a short time this city will lose its splendour.

"Surely this impregnable Lanka will wither up (lose its splendour) and appear like a widow when this sinful Ravana, a mean demon is killed.

"This city of Lanka with many auspicious celebrations will lose its king and all mean ogresses will remain like widows.

"I shall surely hear very soon sounds of distressful cry of young ogresses in every household.

"Totally burnt by Rama's arrows, this Lanka will be filled with darkness, and its splendour lost and preeminent demons destroyed.

"If the heroic Rama of bloodshot eyes comes to know that I am here at Ravana's, the expiry of time limit fixed by this cruel, lowly, foolish Ravana has arrived, this wicked fellow's death is inevitable.

Nothing is forbidden for sinful demons. A calamity will befall now due to this adharma. The flesheating ogres are aware of neither dharma nor adharma.

"This demon is determined to make me his morning meal. How can I do anything in the absence of my lord of pleasing countenance. I am distressed very much by not seeing Rama, possessed of eyes with a reddish tinge in the corners.

"If I can find some one who can give me poison now I shall soon see the lord of death without my lord.

"Neither Lakshmana nor his elder brother knows that I am here alive. (Had they known) both of them would have ransacked this earth.

"Would it be that the heroic elder brother of Lakshmana has gone to the abode of gods unable to find me on this earth?

"Blessed are the gods, gandharvas, and siddhas and great sages who are able to see my lotuseyed lord Rama.

Or that royal sage, wise Rama who always seeks dharma having become one with the supreme spirit has no longer any interest in me?

"Love attaches itself to one who remains before one's eyes.Friendship fades with separation. The ungrateful destroy love and friendship (as their love is conditioned by frequent meetings). But it cannot happen in case of Rama.

"Do I, a charming lady, not have any good fortune because of my past deeds? I wonder how a foremost woman like me seperated from my husband is sinking in grief without Rama. Has my fortune diminished?

Instead of living separated from noble and brave Rama, a blemishless character and a destroyer of enemies, it is better for me to die.

"May be both the brothers, foremost among men, have laid down their arms, and taken to asceticism, subsisting on roots and fruits.

"Or else, has this wicked demon king slain both the brothers Rama and Lakshmana by some deceptive means?

"By all means I wish to die in these circumstances. However, death is not ordained for me even in this sorrowful state.

Blessed are the exhalted sages who have not committed any sin. They have self control and have subdued their senses. There is no pleasure or displeasure for them.

"Salutations to those exalted souls who have distanced themselves from pleasure and displeasure. Pleasures may not lead to suffering or displeasure to excessive, meaningless fear for such great souls.

"Separated from the wise Rama who deserves pleasant things I will give up life being under the clutches of the sinful Ravana.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे षडिवंश स्सर्गः।  Thus ends the twentysixth sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.