Hearing Sita's words, some terrifying demonesses, overwhelmed with anger, went to inform Ravana, who was quick to act.

The dreadfullooking demonesses once again approached Sita and conveyed her categorically in harsh words the terrible consequences (ahead)

"O vile one you are determined in your evil ways. Today these shedemons will eat away your flesh to their heart's content ".

Then seeing the ignoble shedemons threatening Sita, an old demoness called Trijata, who was lying down there, saidः

"Devour yourselves now, O ignoble ones, if you will. Do not eat Janaka's favourite daughter, the daughterinlaw of Dasaratha.

"Tonight I had a terrific, horriplating nightmare in which I saw the annihilation of all demons and the triumph of Sita's husband".

Seized with fear, the shedemons, overcome with wrath on hearing Trijata's words said to her.

"O Trijata, tell us the kind of dream you dreamt last night", they insisted. Hearing the words from the mouth of the shedemons, Trijata told them all about her dream.

"Rama, in white attire, wearing a garland of white flowers, ascending a palanquin made of ivory drawn by a thousand swans and coursing through the sky with Lakshmana arrived.

"I also saw Sita in my dream wearing white robes and perched on a white mountain surrounded by the ocean.

"Just as light is united with the Sun, I saw Sita united with Rama. I saw Rama with Lakshmana riding a huge, mountainlike elephant having four tusks.

"Dressed in white garlands and clothes, the two brothers, tigers among men, glowing in their effulgence approached Janaki.

"Then from the front of the mountain Janaki shifted to the back of the elephant held by her husband waiting in the sky.

"Then I saw the lotuseyed Sita springing up from the lap of her husband and playfully caressing the Moon and Sun with her palms.

"Then the excellent elephant was seen halted in the city of Lanka with both princes and the largeeyed Sita mounted on the elephant.

"Rama accompanied by his wife Sita came on a chariot yoked to eight white oxen.

"Valiant Rama, foremost among men, accompanied by his brother Lakshmana and wife Sita went towards the northerly direction in the wonderful Pushpaka chariot that resembled the Sun.

"In this way I saw in my dream Rama as valiant as Lord Visnu accompanied by his brother Lakshmana and his wife Sita.

"Just as a sinner cannot attain heaven Rama cannot be won by gods or demons, even rakshasas and others.

"I saw the body of Ravana lying on the ground smeared with oil, clad in red, wearing a garland of lilies and intoxicated with drinking.

"Tonight I saw (in another dream) Ravana with shaven head, clad in black clothes, fallen down on the ground from the Pushpaka chariot, being dragged by a woman.

"He was wearing red garlands and unguents, his body smeared with oil. He was drinking, laughing and dancing, his mind and senses perplexed. He was driving on a chariot yoked to donkeys.

"I saw the demon king Ravana running behind the chariot driven by donkeys in the southerly direction. He was falling with his head bent down and deluded by the fear of the donkey.

"I saw Ravana, getting up quickly, in a bewildered state, terrorstricken, totally confused in intoxication. He had gone almost insane, naked uttering words of abuse. Plunged into a pool of filth and emitting foul smell he disappeared into a helllike dark chamber.

A dark woman clad in red, body smeared with wet mud was seen dragging the ten- necked Ravana by his neck towards the abode of Yama in the southerly direction.

"There I saw the nightranger, Kumbhakarna and also Ravana's sons, their bodies smeared with oil.

"The tennecked Ravana was seen (this time) riding on a boar, Indrajit on a crocodile and Kumbhakarna on a camel all set towards the southerly direction.

"Only Vibhishana was under a white umbrella clad in white, with white garlands and white sandal paste.

"(Hailed by) the sounds of conches and drums, and of musicians and dancers, Vibhishana was seen ascending on to a decorated fourtust elephant which was huge like a mountain and trumpting like a thundering cloud. He stood there along with four ministers and reached the aerial region.

" A large group of demons was seen collected together, drinking, wearing red garlands and red clothes, singing and playing musical instruments.

"I saw this delightful Lanka teeming with horses, chariots and elephants, archways and towers crumbling and falling into the ocean.

In my dream I saw this city of Lanka protected by Ravana burnt down by a powerful _vanara_ , a messenger of Rama.

"All the demonesses in the city of Lanka which had turned dry, reduced to ashes, were dancing, laughing and shouting loudly drunk with oil..

"Kumbhakarna and other demon leaders wearing red clothes entered into a pool of cow dung.

"(Therefore) go away from here. You will be totally destroyed by Rama who will secure his wife and will kill all of you along with others in great anger.

"Rama will not approve of any one abusing or threatening his venerable, beloved wife, who had led a life of exile with him.

"Give up these cruel taunts. Speak to her in a cordial manner. We will beg Vaidehi's forgiveness. I like this kind of action.

"When any demoness in a sorrowful state dreams this kind of dream, she will be relieved of sorrow and will obtain supreme joy.

"O demonesses beg her (pardon) now even though you had threatened her earlier. Where is the need to hesitate? There is cause for concern for demons from Rama.

"O shedemons, this Janaka's daughter from Mithila who is capable of protecting you against great dangers will be pleased by your submission.

"Look at the signs on her body. There is not a little inauspiciousness in the limbs of the largeeyed princess from Mithila.

A great suffering has befallen a lady who does not deserve to suffer. Therefore, a change in her complexion has occured.

"I see the day of fulfilment for Vaidehi has drawn near. I can also foresee the destruction of the demon king and the triumph of Rama.

"This dream indeed served as an augery for good news about her. Look, her (left) eye which is large like a lotus petal is throbbing.

"The left shoulder of this great Vaidehi has started suddenly throbbing, indicating that she is feeling a bit happy.

"Her excellent left thigh, comparable to a female elephant's trunk is trembling, as though indicating that Rama is standing in her presence.

"One can see the bird which utters excellent sweet notes indicating happy tidings, entering again and again the foliage of the tree, a delightful bird, as if prompting Sita again and again to rejoice.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे सप्तविंशस्सर्गः।  Thus ends the twentyseventh sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.