The mighty Hanuman crossed the inviolable sea, stood comfortably on the peak of Trikuta mountain and looked at Lanka.

Covered fully with the continuous shower of flowers dropped on him from the trees, heroic Hanuman appeared as though he was a heap of flowers as he stood there.

The glorious, powerful vanara (Hanuman) even after crossing a hundred yojanas, felt neither suffocated nor exasperated.

(He said to himself), "I can cross a distance of even hundreds of yojanas. What to say of a hundred yojanas which is a calculated distance."

Courageous and exalted Hanuman, the best among vanaras, noted for his speed reached Lanka crossing over the great ocean on his own.

Hanuman passed through forests laden with fragrant flowers, bluish grassy land, big rocks and mountains covered with trees.

Brilliant Hanuman, a bull among monkeys, crossed the mountains covered with blossoming trees and forest ranges.

That son of the Windgod stood on the mountain and saw the forests and groves round Lanka situated on the mountain peak.

The mighty vanara saw around Lanka, trees like sarala, karnikara in full bloom, datepalms, priyala, muchulinda, kutaja, kethaka trees filled with fragrance priyangu, kadamba, so also flowering plants like saptachhada, asana, kovidara and karaveera fully loaded with flowers and buds. These trees were thronged by birds, with their branches shaken by the wind. Flocks of swans and waterfowls were found in ponds of different types. There were various pleasure groves with flowers in bloom and fruits of all seasons and varieties of water resorts and delightful gardens.

Fortunate Hanuman having reached Lanka ruled by Ravana found it surrounded by moats full of blue lotuses, guarded by demons with frightening bows, in view of Sita abducted and kept there. It was protected by boundary walls inlaid with gold that great and beautiful city with buildings resembling the assembly of planets and whitewashed, elevated houses looking like autumnal clouds and well laid out streets decorated with garlands of banners and flag posts, rows of colourful creepers and festoons. The city of Lanka appeared like Amaravati, the city of gods.

The foremost among the vanaras, perched on top of the mountain saw the city of Lanka on the mountain with auspicious mansions as though touching the sky.

The city of Lanka, ruled by the lord of demons and built by Visvakarma looked as if it was a city floating in the sky.

Having reached the northern entrance of the city he started thinking that Visvakarma must have conceived Lanka as a lady with its ramparts as her hips and loins, moats filled with water as her robes, the spiked iron tridents as her locks of hair, and the tall towers as her her ear rings

Observing Lanka that resembled mount Kailas, with sky scrapers appearing as if flying, filled with dreadful demons and nagas protecting the city of Bhogavati (the city of Patala), unimaginably wellbuilt. It was once occupied by Kubera (half brother of Ravana). It was guarded by horrible demons holding tridents and spears in their hands. The city appeared like a cavern protected by venomous serpents with protruding fangs. Hanuman examined the high security of Lanka and looked at the ocean. He thought of the form of Ravana, a formidable enemyः

'It is not possible for monkeys to come here and even if they do, it is no use. Lanka is invincible even to the gods in war.

'What will Rama the mighty armed hero do even after reaching this formidable city of Lanka ruled by Ravana?

'There is no scope for reconciliation with the demons. It is not possible to win over them with gifts. They cannot be divided by dissension. There is no scope for war.

'Only four great monkeys can have access to this place. They are Angada the son of Vali, Nila, Sugriva, the wise king of monkeys and myself.

'Whether Janaka's daughter, Vaidehi is alive or not is not known. After seeing her I shall think over'.

Standing on the mountain, the elephant among monkeys pondered for a while on the means of finding Sita, in which lay the welfare of Rama.

'I shall not be able in my present form to enter the city guarded by fierce and powerful demons.



'To accomplish this great task I will have to assume an inconspicious form and enter the city of Lanka in the night as that is the appropriate time.

'Looking at the city, unassailable even to gods and demons, Hanuman sighed again and again thinkingः

'By what means can I find Mythili, daughter of Janaka, without being noticed by the evilminded Ravana, the lord of demons?

'How can the purpose of Rama, a noble soul be not spoilt? I may have a private audience with the daughter of Janaka.

'Just as darkness disappears at Sunrise, wellplanned strategies also fail at the hands of a thoughtless messenger when they are set in opposition to proper time and place.

'Even though messengers are not intelligent, they think themselves clever and capable. They act foolishly, swerve from proper course of action and fail in their effort.

'How should the task be performed? How to avoid impetuousness? How can my purpose of crossing the ocean be not wasted?

'If I am seen by the demons, the plan of Rama, possessor of selfknowledge, to kill Ravana, will be wasted.

'It is difficult to stay with the demon anywhere here even in the disguise of a demon without being identified. It will not be possible to remain unidentified even by assuming any other form.

'I think even the wind who has no form cannot move here without being detected. Nothing escapes the notice of powerful demons. There is nothing unknown to them.

'I will surely meet with death if I hide here in my original form and my master's mission also will be spoilt.

'Therefore I shall transform myself into a tiny form and jump about the city of Lanka during night time in order to accomplish Raghava's purpose.

'Entering by night the inaccessible city of Ravana, I shall search all over the palace and find Sita'.

Having planned in that manner the heroic Hanuman keen to see Sita waited for the Sunset.

When Sun set, Maruti, the son of the Windgod, reduced himself at night to the small size of a cat, wonderful to behold.

As soon as dusk had set in, courageous Hanuman jumped in and entered the well laidout royal path of the beautiful city.

Hanuman saw the city stretched with rows of buildings all over,with seven or eight storied mansions, which had pillars of gold and silver, windows with fretwork of gold, inlaid with crystals, floors decorated with gold, resembling the grand city of gandharvas.

Inlaid with precious gems and fretwork, and ornamented with pearls, the mansions of demons looked splendid.

The golden archways of the demon were colourful. They illuminated the well decorated Lanka from all sides.

Beholding Lanka of unimaginable, wonderful glory, the great monkey keen to see Sita became sad as well as elated at once (He did not know how to find Sita in that city and felt sad. But he was also elated that he was going to meet her at any cost.)

He found that famed place with a garland of tall, white mansions, conspicuous with archways latticed with gold strings, protected by mighty Ravana and surrounded by terrific demons.

Even the Moon rose with thousands of rays in the centre of multitudes of stars overspreading and illumining the world with a canopy of bright beams, as if to render ministerial help to Hanuman.

The heroic vanara saw the rising Moon flitting in and out shining like a fresh white conch, in the colour of milk and lotus stalks, bright like a swan floating in the lakelike sky.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे द्वितीयस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the second sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.