Sita who was like the daughter of the gods heard the son of the Windgod for her benefit and repliedः

"O vanara just as the earth feels happy when the half grown crops receive rain, I feel happy after seeing you. You have been speaking pleasing words

"Be kind to me and act in such a manner that I may embrace my lord passionately with  my body emaciated with grief.

"O best leader of vanaras remind Rama about the incident of the release of a blade of grass in anger blinding one of the eyes of the crow narrated to you.

'(Further remind him), 'When my tilaka mark was erased, you painted tilaka with a stone (manassita pigment) nearby. O Rama you should remember that (incident).

'Rama you are like Indra and Varuna in valiance. How are you tolerating Sita seized, dwelling among the demons?

"O sinless Rama this wonderful Chudamani of mine has been carefully safeguarded. Seeing this is like seeing you when I am in distress.

"I am sending you this (Chudamani) born of the sea. O glorious Rama and now engrossed in grief it is not possible for me to live.

"I am tolerating this unbearable grief, and the words of the dreadful ogresses piercing my heart. Only for you.

"O subduer of enemies O prince I will hold on to life only for a month. I will not survive beyond a month in your absence.

"The demon king is frightful. He looks at me with immoral (lusty) eyes. I do not wish to live even for a moment after hearing about the adversities (you have faced)."

Hearing the words of Sita who was weeping piteously, brilliant Hanuman said thisः

"O irreproachable lady I swear by you that Rama has grown averse to everything out of grief of separation from you. When Rama is in grief even Lakshmana gets immersed in sorrow.

"O beautiful lady somehow I could meet you. This is not the time to worry about. You will see the end of suffering at this very moment.

"Both the princes are tigers among men and crushers of enemies. They are determined to see you, and will reduce Lanka to ashes.

"O largeeyed lady Killing in war the vile Ravana, the demon king and all his relatives, Rama would take you back to his own city৷৷

"O unimpeachable lady give one more identification which would make him more happy".

"I have already given the best identification. When you hand this jewel used on my hair to him, he will believe what you tell him".

The illustrious vanara held the ornament, prostrated to Sita and prepared to depart.

Seeing Hanuman eager to leap, enlarging his body quickly, she appeared pitiable with her face filled with tears and throat choked.

"O Hanuman to the lionlike brothers Rama and Lakshmana, to Sugriva including his ministers and to every one convey my good wishes.

"You should make efforts in such a manner that the mightyarmed Rama will help me in crossing the cean of sorrow.

"Foremost vanara tell Rama about my intense grief as well as the threats of the demons. May your journey be happy.

Hanuman understood the message of princess Sita and felt delighted at heart at his accomplishment. Considering the small task yet to be accomplished he reached the northern shore mentally (He thought of Rama who waited in Kishkinda which is in the northern direction).  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे चत्वारिंशस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the fortieth sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.