Powerful Hanuman, having burnt the entire city of Lanka, put out the fire on his tail in the ocean. Beholding the burning city, the destroyed gardens and the panic stricken ogres, he began to thinkः

Overtaken by great fear, Hanuman felt a sense of selfreproach seeing Lanka reduced to ashes, and said, ' Lanka is burnt. What a heinous action has been perpetrated by me'.

'Blessed indeed are the highsouled men, who in their wisdom restrain their own anger as one would put off burning fire with water.

'Which sinful act an angry man will not commit? He will even kill his respectable elders or insult sages with his harsh tongue.

'An angry person knows not what he should utter and what he should not. No act appears wrong for an angry man. Nothing is unutterable for him at any time, anywhere.

'A man who drives away his rising anger with tolerance just as a snake casts off its slough is alone called a truly wise man.

'Fie upon me, a wicked, shameless person and the greatest sinner for betraying the master and setting fire to the city without thinking of Sita.

'If this Lanka is burnt, even noble Janaki is burnt, my master's work is spoilt by me unknowingly.

'My very mission is foiled. Sita has not been protected by me for no part of Lanka has escaped unburnt.

'A small work is done, no doubt. But the very root of my achievement has been destroyed in my anger.

'Surely Janaki has perished in Lanka, for not even a little place is left unburnt. The entire city is reduced to ashes.

'If my work has been destroyed by my perversity of judgement, I will give up my life now and here itself'.

'Shall I end my life by jumping into fire just now, or else into the mouth of submarine fire? Should I offer my body to the living creatures of the ocean as their food?

'Having spoilt the entire work how can I show my face to the king of monkeys? How is it possible to see both the tigers among men?

'On account of my mistake of yielding to anger, I have exhibited the unstable monkeynature and made it well established in the three worlds.

'Fie upon my hasty action commited due to lack of selfcontrol. I did not save Sita eventhough the entire situation was under my control. (I had the capacity to save her. But I failed due to anger.)

'If the two princes know about Sita's loss they will die and when they are dead Sugriva would perish along with all his relatives.

'How will the loving righteous brother, Bharata along with Satrughna survive after hearing this?

'When the righteous Ikshvaku race perishes the people would be tormented by grief and remorse. There is no doubt.

'I have failed in seeking dharma and artha. It is evident is that I am a destroyer of the world because I was overtaken by anger. How unfortunate I am'

When Hanuman was thus bemoaning, good omens as in the past appeared before him. He started reflecting once againः

'On the other hand a beautiful and auspicious lady like Sita will be protected by her own splendour and will not perish as fire cannot extinguish fire. (Sita is pure like fire. Here the great sage Valmiki is suggesting the future incident in which Sita emerged safe from 'Agnipariksha' or fireordeal.)

'Fire cannot touch that lady who is protected by her own chastity and who is wedded to the righteous man of immasureable glory.

'Fire, the consumer of oblations who has the property of burning has not burnt me and this is surely on account of Rama's power and Vaidehi's merits.

'To Bharata, Lakshmana and Satrughna she is a goddess and she is dear to Rama's heart, how would she perish?

'If not so, the firegod who never fails in burning has not burnt my tail. How will he burn noble Sita?'

Then Hanuman thought of the appearance of mountain Hiranyanabha in the midst of water, a wonderful phenomenon.

'By virtue of her power of asceticism, power of truthfulness and exclusive devotion towards her husband, she may consume the fire. Fire will not burn her'.

As Hanuman was thinking so, he heard the words of the great charanas who were praising the queen's power of righteousness.

'Oh Hanuman has indeed accomplished the marvellous task of spreading the terrific fire on the demons buildings.

The city is crowded with women, children and old demons running (in a bid to save themselves). The loud wails of demons resounded in the mountaincaves. It was as if the city was shrieking loudly.

'The city with its towering markets, ramparts and portals is burnt, but Janaki is not. It is really wonderful, strange

With omens that proved to be right and for good reasons and from the words of the sages (charanas), Hanuman felt happy.

Hanuman, having fulfilled his desires and knowing that Sita is not hurt, thought of departing after meeting Sita once again (to testify that she is really safe).  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे पञ्चपञ्चाशस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the fiftyfifth sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.