Thus addressed by Hanuman, Rama held the token (Chudamani) against his bosom and wept with Lakshmana.

Seeing the precious jewel, Rama's eyes were filled with tears. Overwhelmed with grief, he spoke to Sugriva.

"Just as a cow fond of its calf begins to distil milk from its teats at the sight of the calf, so does my heart melt at the sight of this excellent jewel.

"At the time of marriage, this jewel was presented by my father-in-law. Vaidehi wore it on her forehead and it looked charming.

"This was found in water and was bestowed by Indra out of great joy on Janaka who had performed a grand sacrificial ceremony. So it was worshipped by elders of the family.

"O noble Sugriva now when I see this excellent jewel, I get direct sight of my father and king of Videha (in the same way as I obtained the sight of Sita).

"This jewel was shining on the head of my beloved. Now its mere look makes me feel that I am seeing her.

"O handsome Hanuman Sita is like water for a thirsty person. Tell me again and again what Sita said to you. Sprinkle on me (lifegiving) water of her words in the form of message.

"O Saumitri I see this jewel born (formed) under water but not her. What can be more sorrowful to me?

(Addressing Hanuman again) "O dear, if she can live for a month it is living for long. I would not live for a moment without the black-eyed Vaidehi.

"Take me to the place you saw my beloved. Knowing where she is I cannot stay here even for a moment.

"She is always very timid. How can my fairhipped beloved remain in the midst of dreadful and fearsome demons?

"Her face resembling the autumnal Moon bereft of its stain, though covered with rainclouds does not shine so bright.

"O Hanuman Tell me now truly what has been told by her. I am eager to know. Indeed, it will keep me alive just as medicne does. (I shall survive on the strength of her message)

That lovely Sita who speaks sweetly, that fairhipped beautiful one who has been separated from me, my beloved, what did she say? Please narrate.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे षट्षष्टितमस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the sixtysixth sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.