Thus asked by Sri Rama, Hanuman repeated everything spoken by Sita to Rama.

"O bull among men queen Janaki related to me as a token of identification an incident that had taken place at Chitrakuta in the past.

"When she was lying on your lap happily she awoke early and a crow came swiftly and scratched on her breast.

"O Bharata's brother, when Sita awoke from sleep you slept on her lap. The same crow again hurt her.

Again and again the crow came to her and scratched her. She woke you up as you were getting wet with blood shed from her body.

"O scorcher of enemies pained by the crow hurting her repeatedly, while you were sleeping happily, she woke you up and informed you about it.

"Seeing the blood flowing from her breasts you became furious like a hissing serpent and saidः

"You are of timid nature. Who has scratched your breasts with the tip of the nail? Who is sporting with an enraged fivehooded serpent"?

'Seeing all over, at once I glanced at the crow that stood in front of her with sharp bloodstained nails'.

'That crow, the foremost of the birds was the son of Indra moving about all over the earth swiftly. His speed matched the Windgod's.

'O longarmed, wise and revered Rama, then in anguish you took a cruel decision'.

'You took out a blade of grass from your mat and chanted the mantra to invoke the weapon of Brahma (Brahmastra) and hurled it on the crow. It blazed like the fire of the doom's day.

'You hurled the blazing blade of grass on to the crow. That burning blade of grass chased the crow.

'He was abandoned by his father, even by great sages and gods. Then he went round the three worlds but could not find a saviour.

'O destroyer of enemies the crow came back again to you trembling seeking protection from you and fell on the ground. Even though it deserved to be slayed, you saved him out of compassion.

'O Rama since a divine weapon cannot be withdrawn, it did strike his right eye'.

'Thereafter that crow left without killing offered salutations to you and king Dasaratha and returned to his abode.

'You are efficient, foremost among wielders of weapons, truthful and powerful. Why are you not directing weapons against the demons?

'It is not possible for nagas, gandharvas, even asuras or Marutas to confront Rama in war.

'If you have any anxiety about me, you will certainly slay Ravana in the battle immediately with your sharp arrows'.

'For what reason is the the scorcher of enemies, Lakshmana, the best of men also does not protect me at the behest of Rama, his brother?

'Why are the two tigers among men whose power is like that of wind and fire and who are unassailable even to suras are neglecting me?

'Have I done any great sin because of which even though both the scorchers of enemies are capable, they are not doing so?'

"On hearing Vaidehi's piteous words, I once again said this to the noble ladyः

'O divine lady I swear to you on my truthfulness, that out of grief for you Rama is not interested in anything else and Lakshmana is deeply afflicted because Rama is overhelmed with grief.

'O lovely lady somehow I could discover you. This is not the moment for lamentation.Your grief will end.

'The two princes, tigers among men are blameles. They are anxious to see you. They will reduce this Lanka into ashes.

'O fairhipped lady Rama will slay fearsome Ravana and all his relatives and take you to his city. It is certain.

'O blameless lady you should give me that which he would be glad to recognise as a token.'

"O mighty Rama, she glanced at all directions and untied the end of her garment in which she had this best jewel worn on her hair preserved and gave it to me.

"O foremost among the Raghus I took that wonderful gem for your sake from the noble lady and offered her salutations, bowing my head, and returned quickly৷৷

"Seeing me eager to depart and growing in size, the loving daughter of Janaka said.

"She was dejected. Her face was filled with tears. Despondent at my departure, she shed tears profusely and saidः

'Hanuman tell both Rama and Lakshman who are like two lions, Sugriva and his ministers about my welfare.

'You may go and tell mighty Rama to make arrangements to relieve me from this  ocean of sorrow.

'O foremost among the heroic monkeys approaching Rama, you should tell him the intensity of my sorrow and the threatening of the shedemons. Let your journey be speedy and auspicious.'

"O lion among kings noble Sita has spoken these words in griefः 'Make him know all this and tell him that Sita is faithful and safe in all respects.'  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे सप्तषष्टितमस्सर्गः।।  Thus ends the sixtyseventh sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.