Then seeing Sri Rama standing and thinking of the war, duly prepared, Rishi Agastya came with Devatas to witness the war with Ravana and spoke as follows.

"O mighty armed Sri Rama! Dear, hear this eternal secret (mantra) which will enable you to win all the enemies in war."

"Rama! Listen to this sacred mantra, 'Aditya Hridayam' which can bring victory, which is eternal, very auspicious, and supremely blessed and prolongs life of all by means of which you will destroy all enemies, root out sins, remove anxiety and always bring victory.

"You worship the Sun God, crowned with rays rising up at the horizon, greeted by all gods and demons, who brings light to all and who is the embodiment of all gods."

"He is the self in all, glorious, he sustains by his rays of light, the gods, suras and the whole world. He is the Lord of all.

"In the same way, he is the body of Brahma the creator, he is Vishnu also, Shiva also, S Kanda, Prajapati, Mahendra, Kubera, time spirit, Yama, Soma, and Varuna also.

"He is the god of manes, Vasava, Sadhayas, Aswins, Marutha, Manu, wind god, fire god, life of all beings and god of all seasons.

"You are the son of Aditi, the sungod, creator Savitha, the courser in the heavens, the sustainer, the possessor of golden rays, Bhanu, shining with golden rays, the Sun god.

"You are the possessor of seven green horses, having a thousand rays, having horse Sapta, destroyer of darkness, mitigator of the suffering of all devotees, giver of happiness, destroyer of all names and forms, the infuser of life in the cosmic egg and having the allpervading rays.

"You have the golden cosmic egg in the womb, you are cool, you are the purifier, the ruler of all, bringer of day, who Bears the fire of dissolution in the womb. You are the son of Aditi, blissful personified and destroyer of cold.

"You are the Lord of the sky, dispeller of darkness, the master of the three VedasRig, Yajur and Sama, the sender of rain, the friend of water and the courser of the path of Vindhya swiftly.

"You are the possessor of heat, adorned with a circle of rays. You are killer of all enemies, tawny destroyer of all, omniscient, lover of all devotees and source of all evolutes.

"You are the Lord of all stars and planets. You are the creator of all, resplendent among the splendid, the twelve faces of twelve months. Hail to you.

"Hail to you, rising on the east mountain, setting in the west. Hail to the Lord of all luminaries.

"Namaskar, Namaskar to the giver of victory, joy born of victory, god having green horses. Hail to you Aditya.

"Hail to you of terrible form, of valiant one, denoted by the syllable 'AUM'. Namaskar to the awakener of lotuses. Namaskar to the fierce one.

"Namskar to you, the ruler of Brahma, Siva and Vishnu, to you the Sun god, the spiritual dwelling light in solar orbit, the consumer of all appearing in the form of Rudra.

"You are the dispeller of darkness, dispeller of cold, dispeller of enemies, your extent is immeasurable. You are the destroyer of the ungrateful, the ruler of lights, the Lord of all and namaskar to you.

"Namaskar to one possessing the lustre of pure gold, dispeller of darkness, architect of the universe, splendor incarnate in the form of fire in all, witnessor of all actions in the world.

"Being a creator and destroyer of the world, this Sun god alone radiates, creates thirst by heat and rains to relieve.

"He alone pervades the created beings and remains awake in sleep. He alone is the fire sacrifice as well as the fruits obtained from fire sacrifice.

"He is all vedas, as well as all the sacrifices as also the fruits of all sacrifices. He is the supreme controller of all actions in all worlds.

"O Raghava! Anyone praying to him will surely not experience grief in straits, in difficulties, in the woods and in times of fear.

"Worship the Lord of the universe, the Lord of Lords. Worship him alone with concentration of mind, three times of the day by chanting his name. You will attain victory in war."

Agastya having spoken in that way to the mighty armed Rama to worship the Sun God and assuring him that the very moment he will be able to kill Ravana, left in the same way.

Then Rama endowed with extra ordinary energy having heard Agastya, was very delighted and stopped worry. He remembered Aditya and chanted in his mind.

Sipping water three times and looking at Aditya, the valiant Rama getting purified, with devotion chanted the supreme with delight. Then he took up his bow, fixing his eyes at Ravana, and advanced for war with an allout effort determined to destroy Ravana.

And thereafter, the Sun god delighted at heart, overwhelmed with joy surrounded by gods looking at Rama knowing that the Rakshasa king will be destroyed, came quickly to Rama and uttered 'hurry up'.  ।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेसप्तोत्तरशततमस्सर्गः ।।  This is the end of the one hundred and seventh sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by Sage Valmiki.