Seeing enraged wise Rama's countenance, all beings on earth were shaken in fear.

The mountains that were abode of lions and tigers with trees shook and the ocean, the king of rivers, was seen agitated.

Dreadful and portentous clouds went in circles all over sky looking like donkeys emitting harsh sounds.

Rama became highly furious, most dreadful sounds were rising up and all beings were frightened. Ravana was also afraid.

Then from the aerial chariots, Devas, Gandharvas, great Nagas, sages, devils, giants, birds, and eagles watched the duel war that went on between the heroes clashing with different kinds of frightening weapons like at the dissolution of the world.

Then watching the great war, all the Suras, Asuras, lost control and overcome with happiness spoke these words with devotion.

Firmly established the Asuras uttered 'Victory to the Ten headed Ravana', and Devas for their part pronounced 'Rama be victorious' again and again.

In the meantime, the evil self Ravana who is called so, as he makes others cry, in intense anger making loud noise, stroking an unassailable weapon which was like the thunderbolt, capable of killing all enemies, a spike which closely resembled mountain peaks, dreadful even to think, like a mass of smoke, sharp and pointed, blazing like at the dissolution of the universe, very frightening, difficult to hand le, like the god of death, a terror for all beings, frightening, tearing, splitting, glowing like trident seized hold of to attack Rama.

In the battlefield surrounded by Rakshasa heroes, enraged valiant Ravana took up the trident holding it in the middle.

Gigantic Ravana, eyes turned red in anger, raising the trident made formidable noise to make his army extremely joyful in the battlefield.

By the horrible sound made by the Rakshasa king, the earth, even the heavens, similarly the quarters and corners trembled.

By the loud roar of the evilminded Ravana's sound, all living beings feared and even the ocean was set to tremble.

Ravana who was endowed with extraordinary valour, taking hold of the trident, addressed Rama harshly in a loud tone.

"O Rama! This thunderbolt like trident taken up by me now will take away your life along with your brother's."

"I, who commend warfare, will quickly kill you today in the forefront of the army and join you with Rakshasa heroes who were killed."

"O Raghava! Stay there. Right now, I will kill you with this trident." Having spoken that way, Ravana hurled the trident.

The trident discharged from Ravana's hand, made circles of lightning, and covered the atmosphere with its glow and shine along with eight bells making loud sounds.

Valiant Raghava, seeing the glowing trident that was horrible to look at, loosed a number of arrows at it.

Raghava intercepted the trident, just as the fire was obstructed by the flow of water, at the time of universal dissolution, and obstructed.

The arrows released from Rama's bow fell on the great trident of Ravana and burnt like moths falling in fire.

Rama was overcome with fury on seeing his arrows being crushed to powder in the sky on touching the trident and reduced to ashes.

Raghava, the enhancer of the joy of Raghus, lifted up the javelin brought by Matali, esteemed by Indra.

When mighty Rama lifted up that javelin, it rendered sonorous sounds of bells and lit up the sky like a meteor at the end of the universal dissolution.

With the hurling of the javelin by Rama at the great trident of Ravana and on (the javelin) touching the trident, it was broken, lost its splendour and fell down.

Rama then released arrows endowed with great speed, shower of multitude of arrows straight into the horses of Ravana and shattered them.

Raghava pierced into the chest of Ravana sharp arrows and with great effort three sharp arrows on the forehead.

Pierced all over the limbs with arrows, blood flowing from the limbs, he (Rakshasa king) appeared like an Ashoka tree in the gathering.

Pierced all over the body with Rama's arrows, body bathed in blood, the king of Rakshasas in the midst of gathering of Rakshasas, was sorrowful but at the same time, he was overcome with violent anger.  ।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेचतुरुत्तरशततमस्सर्गः ।।  This is the end of the hundred and fourth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.