Missile being counteracted, Ravana, the king of Rakshasas, doubled the army later in anger.

Highly effulgent Ravana used another terrific missile, presided over by Rudra, produced by Maya.

Then from his bow issued forth all over flaming tridents, maces, and iron bars like thunderbolt.

Several kinds of sharp multitudes of weapons and flaming thunderbolts issued forth like gales at the time of universal destruction.

Glorious Raghava, who is the best of those proficient in the use of missiles endowed with great splendour, neutralized that missile (of Ravana) with the missile presided over by Gandharvas.

When the missile of Ravana was turned void by the great selfRaghava, Ravana's eyes turned red in anger, and he used a missile presided over by the Sun God.

Thereafter, brilliant discus of the Sun God, issued forth from wise Ravana's bow at a terrific speed.

As they landed together from the sky glowing like Sun, moon, and the planets, it illuminated the quarters.

Raghava with his shafts shattered the discuses and the weapons of Ravana in the forefront of his army.

Rakshasa king, frustrated on seeing the missiles, pierced Rama in his private parts with shafts.

Even though pierced by Ravana with ten arrows, Rama, endowed with high energy, was not shaken.

Then, Raghava, who had won many battles, became highly furious, piercing Ravana in all his limbs with many arrows.

In the meantime, enraged Lakshmana, the brother of Rama, a mighty warrior, seized hold of seven shafts.

Lakshmana, who was endowed with extraordinary splendour, for his part, with his shafts which had great force, shattered the device of man's head on the flag post of Ravana.

Celebrated, mighty Lakshmana struck with his arrows, that hit the head of the charioteer of night ranger, which was glittering with earrings.

Then Lakshmana split with five sharpened arrows the bow of Rakshasa king that resembled elephant's trunk.

Vibheeshana struck with his formidable mace the horses of Ravana which were like dark clouds and huge like mountains.

With the horses of his chariot dead, Ravana descended from the huge chariot and exhibited violent rage against his brother.

Then, endowed with extraordinary energy, the powerful leader of Rakshasas hurled a flaming thunderbolt like javelin at Vibheeshana.

Lakshmana shattered the javelin with three shafts even before it reached him (Vibheeshana). Then the Vanaras raised loud cheer in that huge conflict.

The javelin, which was covered with gold, broke into three parts, and fell down like a huge meteor emitting fire sparks from the heavens.

Then, Ravana seized hold of a huge javelin shining with its own splendour, a formidable one even for the god of death.

That javelin was endowed with speed, resembling thunderbolt in splendour, whirled round by the mighty and evilminded Ravana, shone.

In the meantime, seeing Vibheeshana's life in danger, heroic Lakshmana reached him and stood obstructing (the javelin).

Heroic Lakshmana stretched his bow and showered volley of arrows and covered Ravana who held javelin in hand.

Covered by the stream of shafts discharged by the great self, Lakshmana, Ravana could not shake his hand and was not inclined in his mind to strike (Vibheeshana).

Thus spoke Ravana seeing Lakshmana who stood facing him, who rescued his brother (Vibheeshana).

"Lakshmana! You are proud of your might of rescuing Vibheeshana. Now this javelin released from me will strike at you."

"This javelin released by my bludgeonlike arm will pierce your heart and take away your life."

Enraged Ravana, having spoken in this manner, hurled the javelin adorned with eight bells making loud noise, designed magically by Maya, a stupendous one capable of destroying any enemy, which was glowing with shine, aiming at Lakshmana, and roared aloud.

Hurled at terrific speed, that javelin, which was equal to thunderbolt, speedily went towards Lakshmana in the forefront of war.

Seeing the javelin coming towards Lakshmana, Raghava said 'May Lakshmana be auspicious. May he be well. May your attempt to kill Lakshmana be ineffective and wasted'.

Released by Ravana in anger, that javelin, which was like poison of venomous serpent, pierced into the chest of Lakshmana who stood fearless.

Glowing like the tongue of Vasuki, the king of serpents, flaming, त्त्जवेलिन descended at high speed on the chest of Lakshmana.

Thereafter, Lakshmana fell on the ground, pierced by the javelin, deep into the heart from far with great force by Ravana.

Watching Lakshmana in that situation, most courageous Raghava, out of brotherly affection felt despondent at heart.

He (Raghava) stood confused for a short while as it was, his eyes filled with tears like fire at the end of the universe.

Realizing that this is not the time to be disconsolate, observing Lakshmana's efforts, Raghava resolved to destroy Ravana and started a fierce struggle.

Rama beheld Lakshmana pierced with javelin in the great war bathed in blood and resembling a mountain with a snake penetrated into it.

It was not feasible for the best of Vanaras to pull out the javelin (from Lakshmana's body) discharged with great strength from Ravana's hand, despite great efforts.

It pierced through Lakshmana's body and entered into the earth. Mighty Rama held the terrific javelin with both hands bent it and removed in the course of struggle.

While Rama was pulling out the javelin, mighty and courageous Ravana struck him in his private parts and all over the body with arrows.

Not minding the arrows struck, Rama embraced Lakshmana and spoke to Hanumantha and the great Vanara Sugriva.

"O foremost of Vanaras! Take care of Lakshmana by surrounding him. Just as clouds appeared before the chataka bird waiting for long, time has come to exhibit my valour which was awaited for long. Now I will destroy the ten headed Ravana of sinful resolve rightfully in a short while from now."

"O Vanaras! I take this truthful vow now in your presence. In a short while you will be seeing the world devoid of Ravana or devoid of Rama."

"Leaving the kingdom, and living in D and aka forest, insulted by Rakshasa, Vaidehi in agony, abducted by Rakshasa.

"This great terrific sorrow experienced by me, is like the torture of hell. I will put an end to Ravana today and leave him."

"Because of whom the Vanaras have been dragged into war, Vali was killed, and Sugriva was made king because of whom the bridge was built on the ocean and crossed, such sinful one has come in the range of my sight today."

"This Ravana, having come within the range of my vision, will not survive today, like the serpent having poison in the vision coming in the range of Garuda cannot survive."

"You Vanaras, who are difficult to encounter, watch perched on mountain peaks, this fight between me and Ravana."

Today you may see Rama's Ramahood in the battle. All Gandharvas, all Devas, Rishis, Charanas of all the three worlds will see my fight.

All mobile and immobile beings of all worlds, so also on earth, will be able to see. Theywill talk about this war, collected together in the world, which I will accomplish.

Having spoken in that manner, Rama collected sharp shafts embellished with shining gold ornaments to strike the ten headed Rakshasa.

And then Ravana rained flaming iron arrows and clubs at Rama, which looked like cloud raining arrows.

By the arrows loosed by Rama and Ravana on one another clashing with each other, a loud sound arose.

Broken as under and scattered arrows with flaming tips of both Rama and Ravana fell from the sky to earth (as if filling space).

The dreadful great sound that arose from the bow strings of both Rama and Ravana was astonishing to witness.

By the hail of arrows from the bow of great soul Rama scattered, Ravana and his ministers ran from there out of fear like the clouds chased by the gale.  ।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेएकोत्तरशततमस्सर्गः ।।  This is the end of one hundred one sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.