On seeing Ravana killed by the great soul Raghava, the Rakshasas from the gynaeceum stricken with grief rushed out.

Numerous women, though obstructed, were rolling in dust, with dishevelled hair and crying like cows which had lost their calves.

The Rakshasa women along with Rakshasas came out of the north gate and entered the battlefield screaming 'O son', 'O husband' and crying, seeing the trunks soaked in blood and mud on the ground and went about all over.

Bellowing like female elephants that had lost their husbands, the women roared eyes filled with tears on account of grief for their husbands.

They looked at the gigantic body of Ravana of extraordinary valour, full of splendor, killed and lying like a heap of dark mountain on the ground.

In the battlefield they saw their husband lying, and precipitately fell on his limbs like broken creepers in a garden.

Indeed, out of respect some embraced him and roared aloud, some held his feet and wept, some held his neck and started weeping.

Some lifting their arms threw themselves on ground, some rolled, some beholding the dead Ravana's face became deluded.

One held his head on her lap, and one held his face and looking at it shed tears, like nature covers lotus with dew and roared.

Afflicted on beholding their husband Ravana, killed, and lying on the ground, the Rakshasa women again and again cried exceedingly in many ways overcome with grief.

"By whom Indra feared, by whom Yama feared, at whom king Visrava feared, by whom Pushpaka was deprived to Kubera in war, by whom Gandharvas and ascetics were afraid of, by whom high souled Suras were afraid of lies in the battlefield asleep."

"He, who did not know fear from Asuras or Uragas, experienced fear from a mortal."

"He, whom Devatas, Danavas and Rakshasas could not kill, lies asleep, killed by a mortal who came by walk."

"He, who could not be killed by Suras, Asuras or Yakshas, such a hero lies like a weak person devoid of strength, killed by a mortal, is resting."

Those women grieving in that way roared aloud, lamenting again and again cried, afflicted by sorrow.

"You did not listen to the good advice of your dear and good at heart. You brought Sita and destroyed yourself and all of us at a time."

"Even though good advice was given by your dear brother Vibheeshana, in your delusion evidently you sought your own destruction."

"If Sita, princess of Mithila had been returned by you, this great destruction of the very root and calamity with you and for us would not have happened."

"If your brother's desire had been fulfilled Rama would have turned to be our friend. We would not have been widows. Our enemy's desire would not have been fulfilled."

"With evil intention you kept Sita under detention. These Rakshasas and you and us all the three are together destroyed."

"O Foremost of Rakshasas! You have acted according to your desire alone is not sufficient as divine will make you do everything. He is killed whom destiny kills."

"O mighty armed Ravana! For Vanaras, Rakshasas and you too, this destruction in this war has come by divine grace."

"In the world, to change the divine course of action, it is not possible with wealth, or will or by prowess or king's orders."

The wives of Ravana wailed piteously in that manner filled with grief, eyes dimmed with tears, they roared like krauncha birds.  ।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेत्रयोदशोत्तरशततमस्सर्गः ।।  This is the end of one hundred and thirteenth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.