Highly learned Hanuman greeted and spoke meaningfully to Rama, the foremost among the wielders of bow.

"You ought to see that noble lady Mythili, who was immersed in grief, for whose sake these actions were started and has borne fruit."

"Mythili who is overcome with grief on hearing your victory, was filled with tears in her eyes and desired to see you."

"In an earlier occasion having known me and trusting me expressed that she desires to see Rama with Lakshmana after victory and with gratitude."

When Hanuman had spoken like that, Rama, the upholder of righteousness, shed tears slightly and suddenly became thoughtful.

Drawing a long hot breath, looking at the ground, he spoke to Vibheeshana, who was like a cloud standing there.



When Rama had spoken in that manner, Vibheeeshana for his part hastened to the Gynaeceum and assigned through the women to convey to Sita.

Then Vibheeshana, the prosperous Lord of the Rakshasas seeing Sita greeted her with palms joined together lifted it over his head (as a sign of respect).

"Vaidehi! Anointed with a wonderful fragrance, decked with beautiful ornaments, auspicious and ascending the palanquin, your husband desires to see you."

Vibheeshana, having spoken that way, Vaidehi said to the Lord of Rakshasas that she would like to see him without having a bath.

Hearing Sita's words Vibheeshana replied saying," You will and ought to do what your husband Rama has said."

Noble Mythili (on hearing Vibheeshana), who looked upon her husband as God, said in reply, 'Alright'.

Thereafter Vibheeshana, making Sita to ascend the palanquin, covered with valuable clothes and guarded by numerous Rakshasas after she adorned herself in the best of ornaments and put on glowing wonderful clothes brought to Rama.

Knowing that Sita reached also, great Rama was seen in a meditative mood absorbed in thought. Vibheeshana announced saying, 'Sita has been brought' and greeted with folded palms, full of joy.

On hearing that Sita had arrived, who stayed in Rakshasa's abode for long, Raghava had experienced joy, indignation, and anger, all the three at the same time.

Raghava, analysed with in him, distressed and thinking deeply, seeing Vibheeshana close by, spoke these words.

"O gentle Vibheeshana, let Sita who sought my victory always be quickly brought near me."

On hearing Raghava's words, faithful Vibheeshana instantly assigned people to disperse from there.

Then those who were wearing coats and turbans, holding staffs in hand, warriors started moving and dispersed.

The hordes of Bears, Vanaras and Rakshasas moving about all over there were driven away to a distance from the vicinity.

The great sound heard there was like the uproar of an ocean lashed by a storm.

Seeing them excited to know and dispersing, Raghava stopped them out of kindness.

Exhibiting anger with his gaze at the uproar, Rama addressed the highly intelligent Vibheeshana resenting their action.

"Why are these people being troubled without disregard for me? Stop this excitement. They are my own people."

"For women it is not the house, boundary wall or clothes or protective wall or screen of cloth or even this kind of royal treatment or surrounding, is the protection."

"The appearance of a woman in public is not condemned in times of difficulty, in straits, in conflicts, in the selection of a husband, or in sacrificial ceremonies or marriage ceremonies."

"Sita is in distress and in a highly miserable situation. Her appearance is no fault especially in my presence."

"Therefore, leaving the palanquin let Vaidehi walk on foot only towards me with the help of these Vanaras."

Rama having spoken clearly in that way, Vibheeshana reverently conducted Sita to Rama.

There upon Lakshmana, Sugriva, and Vanara Hanuman, astonished at Rama's statement, became highly distressed.

Seeing Rama having no regard towards Sita, and his harsh gestures, Lakshmana and Sugriva discussed if Rama was displeased with Sita?

Mythili, also adopting modesty, shrinking into her own limbs, approached her husband followed by Vibheeshana.

Sita, a gentle lady, who considered her husband as God only wondered with a mixed feeling of joy and affection and looked at the gentle face of Rama.

She gazed affectionately at the face of her husband, whose countenance was bright like the early morning sun, which she had not seen for long. With the sorrow in her mind dispelled now, her face shone like the bright moon without cloud.  ।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेसप्तदशोत्तरशततमस्सर्गः ।।  This is the end of one hundred and seventeenth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.