Then from among the wives lamenting, the first wife, dear to Ravana gazed at her husband lamenting piteously.

Looking at her husband Ravana killed by Rama of inconceivable exploits, Mandodari piteously lamented there.

"O mighty armed Ravana! O, brother of Visrava! When in anger even Purandara was afraid to stand before you, it is well known."

"For fear of you, even great seers, illustrious Gandharvas, Charanas also went in all directions, is well known."

"O Lord of Rakshasas! Just by Rama, a mortal, you have been killed in war. Are you not shy of it?"

"Winning the three worlds by your valour, you are glorious, irresistible and beyond reach. How did the wanderer in the forest strike you?"

"You lived in an inaccessible place and are capable of assuming any form at will. It is not believable how you have been destroyed by Rama."

"You are always well equipped with the army, so such action (killing you) is not possible for Rama."

" At Janasthana your brother Khara, who was surrounded by many Rakshasas, was killed by a mortal in the same manner."

"To Lanka, which is inaccessible to anyone, Hanuman entered by increasing his valour. Knowing this we worried (that Rama may not be mere mortal)."

"When these terrific Vanaras constructed a bridge over the great ocean, I doubted in my mind at that time itself that Rama is not a mortal."

"Or else, the god of death would have come in the form of Rama for your destruction, having right knowledge and taking an inconceivable recourse.

"Or else O king of extraordinary might! Indra would have come to overthrow you in the form of Rama. Indra has no energy even to look at you in the battlefield."

"It is evident that this Rama is a great yogi, eternal, who has no beginning, middle or end. He is supreme, greater than great and stands beyond darkness, a sustainer. He holds conch, discus, and mace in hand. He has symbols of Srivatsa on his chest. He is ever rich, invincible, everlasting, steady supreme soul and of truthful valour. He is prosperous, a mass of brilliance, Lord Vishnu and the Lord of all worlds, a wellwisher of all. He has come in mortal form, in the form of Vanaras also, and by all gods. He vanquished you along with Rakshasas is evident."

"In the past by winning your senses you gained the three worlds. Now it seems as though the senses have recollected and taken their grudge. You have lost control over your senses, thereby you are killed by your enemy."

" At Janasthana when your brother Khara was surrounded by many Rakshasas also he got killed by a mortal. So also, when Hanuman entered the city of Lanka, which is difficult to enter even for gods, I got perturbed."

"You were advised by me not to have any hostile action with Rama. You had not listened to me. This is the result of that action."

"O Foremost of Rakshasas! To the destruction of your wealth, life and your own people you suddenly developed passion for Sita."

"O evil minded king! Sita is to be respected even more than Arundathi or Rohini. Your arrogant action to her is unworthy."

"O king! You dishonoured your wives and me. Sita, who is tolerant as the goddess of earth, prosperous, goddess of fortune, who is fond of her husband, charming in all respects, living alone in the forest, an auspicious one, desperate, was brought in disguise by you. Before you cherished your desire to be in union with Mythili, surely you got burnt by her austerity."

"When you touched Sita of slender waist, at that time itself you were not burnt. All gods including Indra headed by fire god are approaching you with hostile intention."

"When time comes surely one who does sinful action will reap the result. There is no doubt that the doer of a terrible action will be destroyed."

"Mythili by race is not superior to me even a little, not in civility. Out of infatuation you did not perceive this."

"Death does not happen without reason for any being. To you this happened because of getting Mythili."

"On account of abducting Sita, you invited death from a distance. Devoid of sorrow, Sita will sport with Rama."

"O Hero! Whose stock of merit was less, that you have tumbled down into an ocean of grief. I, having sported with you, clad in picturesque robes and the like, by the aerial car Chaitra ratha on mount Kailasa, Mount Meru and Mandara as well as in divine gardens all over, and various lands with matchless splendour, have been deprived of sensual pleasures because of your falling down. What a pity I am surrounded by ordinary women changed into another woman with fleeting fortunes!"

"Oh King, My Lord! Your shiny eyes with delicate eyebrows, which used to be shiny and delicate your prominent nose brilliant skin resembling moon in pleasantness, lotus in beauty, and Sun in radiance your illuminating crown, your shining crown with gems like the peaks of mountains your coppery lips, glowing earrings, rolling eyes were pleasing earlier in the drinking parlours through inebriety, and your auspicious mouth having been indulged in pleasing talk. Today you are pierced by Rama's arrow and shattered with blood flowing, marrow of brain scattered, soiled by dust, dirtied and without any shine."

"Ha! You are dead. I am widowed. I am foolish as I never thought that this stage will come."

"My father is a king of Danavas, my husband is a Lord of Rakshasas, and my son has won over Indra, the Lord of gods, thus I was excessively proud."

"Those who are capable of protecting me are warriors, as they are capable of crushing the enemies and renowned for their pride of their strength. They had no fear from any quarter. I had this conviction in my mind."

"O Bull among Rakshasas! You are such a famous king. This fear from a human is unknown. How did it come?"

"O king! Your body which is gigantic like a mountain, dark like a sapphire adorned with Keyuras, Angadas, necklaces of cat's eye gems and pearls, which were charming when in the battlefield, and shone brightly on your body with the lustre of your jewels like a rainy cloud with flashes of lightning. It is fixed with numerous arrows cut into pieces by darts and difficult to touch. Since the darts are inserted deep into your vital parts, it is not possible to perform ablution. It is dark, soaked in blood, broken, and crushed like a mountain hit by thunderbolt. Alas, it is not possible to embrace."

"Ha! Could it be a dream? Is it true? How could you be killed by Rama? You who can kill death also, how did you fall prey to death?"

"You are the enjoyer of the treasures of the three worlds, you are the great annoyer of the three worlds and conqueror of the world, and you are the one who lifted up Lord Shanakara's seat."

"You are a subduer of the arrogant, who manifested prowess, who tormented the world, who made the world cry with insolent words."

"He, who commanded uttering harsh words in the presence of the enemy, who protected his own brand, who killed those indulged in terrible deeds.

"He who killed thousands of chiefs of Danavas, Yakshas, and subdued Nivatakavachas in combat"

"He, who obstructed performance of sacrificial rituals, protected his own people, who violated code of conduct in comb at by using conjuring tricks"

"Brought by force virgin girls of Devas, suras and human beings from here and there forcibly and caused the enemy women to mourn"

"In the island of Lanka, he provided for his own sexual pleasures in a concealing manner. He was the foremost among those providers of sensual pleasures."

"Such a husband of mine endowed with this kind of influence, killed by Rama, is lying here. Beholding the lover gone, I am holding this body and standing here."

"O Lord of Rakshasas! Having slept on the best of beds, you are now lying here on the hard ground, body covered with dust. Where are you sleeping?"

"When my son Indrajith was killed by Lakshmana I was in intense grief. Now you have fallen."

"Disconnected with relatives, forsaken by you also, deprived of sensual pleasures, I shall grieve permanently."

"O king! Today, take me on your journey which is very difficult. Stricken with sorrow I cannot live without you."

"You are leaving me, a desperate one, stricken, crying. Why are you desiring to go? Why are you not replying to me?"

"Lord! How is it that you are not angry seeing me coming forth walking through the city gate?"

"O lover of wives! Your wives have come out leaving their veils from their abode to see you. See them, and how is it that you are not angry?"

"These people who were with you are always sporting my Lord. Why do you not call them, why are you not consoling them, or inviting them?"

"King! Chaste women of noble lineage being righteous, serving the elders have been widowed by you. Because of their curse, you have fallen under the sway of your enemy and because of that, this has come to you."

"King! 'The tears of noble women should not fall on the earth's surface' is a popular saying. This calamity is truly a result to you in return."

"King! You have invaded the world by your brilliance and were proud of your heroism. How did you do this mean act of abducting a woman?"

"By your cowardly action of creating an illusory deer, you have brought Rama's consort from the hermitage."

"Indeed, I do not remember you being cowardly in war. The timidness that appeared in you is a sign of the adverseness of fate, for your destruction."

"Mighty armed King! Your brother, who is a knower of matters relating to future, present and past, a truthful one, after your getting Mythili, thought for a while and sighing spoke this. 'The destruction of Rakshasa chiefs is now sure to happen', has come true.' The desire for sensual pleasures and anger has resulted in your death and resulting in this calamity."

"By this major disaster of yours, the very root has been destroyed. With the extermination of the Rakshasas, the entire Rakshasa clan is orphaned now by your action."

"You are famous for your strength and courage. I do not need to wail for you. Being a woman, by nature I am compassionate, and my mind is moving towards sorrow."

"You have taken away the good and evil deeds done by your death. I'm thinking of myself and wailing."

"O Ten headed king! You did not heed the good words of advice given by your friends. You did not totally heed the good words spoken by your brothers."

"You have not listened to the meaningful, agreeable and reasonable advice given according to tradition by Vibheeshana."

"You did not take the advice of both Maricha and Kumbhakarna. You have also not taken the advice of my father because of the pride of your valour. This kind of result is the consequence of that."

"Resembling a dark cloud clad in yellow silk, why are you lying like this with limbs thrown down and body covered with blood?"

"You are sleeping like this while I am stricken with grief. Why are you not replying to me? I am the granddaughter of Malyavantha, a great hero who fought with Daksha. Why are you disowning me and not answering me?"

"Get up, Rise up. When you are insulted why are you lying down? Because you are lying down, even the radiance of the Sun has entered Lanka without fear."

"The iron bar of yours which is effulgent like the Sun and closely resembles the thunderbolt of Indra, with which you have terminated your enemies in the combat, which is regularly worshipped by you, which is adorned with a network of gold, is broken into thousand pieces and lies scattered."

"You are lying in the battlefield embracing it as if it is a loved one. Why are you not willing to answer me?"

"You have returned to the five elements. This heart of mine distressed with grief is not breaking into a thousand pieces."

Wailing in this way, eyes filled with tears, heart filled with extreme love, (Mandodari) she was in delusion.

In a state of unconsciousness, when Mandodari, fell on Ravana's chest, shrunk in agony, she was like a flash of lightning glowing in a rainy cloud reddened by the blow of twilight.

The cowives who had come there weeping aloud and distressed, lifted up roaring Mandodari quickly.

"Devi! Not that you do not know that when fortune changes in the world, dynasty changes. Fortune is not steady."

While Mandodari was being counselled by the co wives like this, she was weeping, shedding tears on her breast as well as bathing her face. She once again wept making a loud sound.

Thereafter, Rama spoke to Vibheeshana like this." Let the obsequies be carried out and all the women comforted."

Then the wise and righteous Vibheeshana thinking made a wholesome and righteous submission in the following words.

"This Ravana had given up righteous conduct, was cruel, merciless, untrue, and had laid hands on others' wives. I do not deserve to perform obsequies to him.

"This Ravana remained doing harm to all and does not deserve the respect of his elder brother, or prayers. He is an enemy in the form of brother. He does not deserve to be worshipped.

"If I am not performing obsequies to my elder brother, the people in this world will call me ruthless. Again, on hearing his blemishes they will say that it is good not to do it for him."

On hearing Vibheeshana's words, Rama, who is good at expression, very affectionately, upholding virtues, spoke as follows to Vibheeshana.

"O Lord of Rakshasas! You are dear to me. It is by your strength I could be victorious. I have to do some kind deed for you.

"This nightranger is full of unrighteousness and untrue. But he was a strong, energetic hero in combat."

"Though he is richly endowed with prowess, he is a tyranny to the world, who has performed a hundred sacrifices (like Indra) and never got defeated, I heard."

"There is no hostility after death for heroes. Let us perform his obsequies. I am also like that in this regard.

"Ten headed Ravana being so (knower of righteousness), he deserves your performance of his last rites as per tradition and righteously You will attain fame by doing this deed."

On hearing Raghava's words, Vibheeshana hastened to perform the last rites of his brother Ravana who had been killed.

Vibheeshana entered the city of Lanka and carried out fire sacrifice quickly for Ravana, the king of Rakshasas.

Vibheeshana arranged to get excellent carts, fires maintained by Ravana, priests, so also sandalwood, and many kinds of wood, fragrant perfumes, sandals, sweet smelling odours, gems, pearls, and corals and proceeded with obsequies.

Surrounded by Rakshasas, in a short time he returned with Malyavan (Maternal uncle of Ravana) and Vibheeshana initiated the task.

As the dead body of Ravana was lifted up for final beatitude, panegyrists hailed him with blasts of several musical instruments and praised him with their faces bathed in tears. The golden cart was decorated with beautiful, picturesque, wonderful pictures and flags. Logs of wood were placed on the body and consecrated by sprinkling fragrant water. With Vibheeshana in the forefront, faces turned to the southern side, all proceeded.

Then Advarya lighted the fires that started glowing up. All the ogres paid their respects seeking refuge and followed.

All the women from the gynaeceum weeping aloud from all sides hastened at quick paces and followed sobbing.

As they advanced forth with Ravana's body, they placed it in a consecrated place. All were highly afflicted with grief. Logs of sandal wood, blocks of Padmaka wood and finally fragrant root of Usira plant, and Brahmya grass were placed on the body. It was covered with the skin of antelope. The last rites of the king were carried out with vedic rites.

Then proceeding in sequence constructing an altar in the southeast and placing sacrificial fire in a proper place, they duly performed in honour of the ruler of Rakshasas.

Then they poured a ladle full of ghee mixed with curd on his shoulders and placed a cart on his feet and a wooden mortar on his thighs.

The learned having placed everything including wooden vessels, wooden ladle to kindle fire, wooden pestle, spoon, and all other requirements at the right place.

Thereafter according to tradition laid down in sastras by great Rsis, the ogres killed a cow and spread a sheet, daubed it with ghee and spread it on the body of the king of Rakshasa.

Then the Rakshasas along with Vibheeshana desperately, eyes dimmed with tears, covered Ravana with several clothes and decorated with garland s and sandal. They sprinkled parched grain.

In accordance with tradition, Vibheeshana set fire. He bathed himself and with wet clothes offered in a wet cloth, holding kusa grass a mixture of sesame seeds and water to Ravana. He prostrated to Ravana and offered his prayers with folded palms. Then he comforted the wives of Ravana and all of them to return to Lanka.

After the women entering the city, Vibheeshana came towards Rama and stood in a submissive manner.

Enemy killed, Rama also accompanied by Sugriva, Lakshmana, and army experienced joy, like Indra (who performed a hundred sacrifices) after killing Vrta.

Rama the destroyer of his enemies, giving up arrows, bow, and the shield given by Mahendra, gave up anger by destroying the enemy and assumed gentleness.  ।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेचतुर्दशोत्तरशततमस्सर्गः ।।  This is the end of one hundred and fourteenth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.