On hearing the sweet reply of Raghava, Lord Maheswara delivered an auspicious message.

"O Lotuseyed, mighty armed, broadchested, a subduer of enemies, by good luck you have performed this action."

"The dread of Ravana in all the worlds which caused gloom and fear has been fortunately removed by you in the war."

"Comforting piteous Bharata, illustrious Kausalya and Kaikeyi too, seeing Lakshmana's mother Sumithra, and attaining sovereignty, make relatives happy. Establishing Ikshvaku race, conducting horse sacrifice and satisfying the Lord attain highest renown by giving wealth in charity to brahmins. You, who are endowed with mighty prowess, deserve to go to heaven", said Lord Maheswara.

"O Kakuthsa! Here is your father, teacher in the mortal world, king Dasharatha seated in the aerial car."

"Liberated by you, his son, the glorious emperor has reached Indra's world. You with your brother Lakshmana offer your salutations to him."

Raghava along with Lakshmana offered salutations to his father seated on top of the aerial chariot after listening to Lord MahaDeva.

Raghava with his younger brother Lakshmana saw his father who was effulgent, blazing and adorned in white clothes.

Then Dasaratha, the ruler of the world, seated in an elevated seat in the aerial car, seeing his son who was dearer than life to him, extremely rejoiced and made Raghava sit on his lap, embraced him, and started speaking as follows.

"Rama separated from you, even the suras and sages honouring me in heaven does not give me happiness. It is true and I promise."

"Today the enemies are killed, and you have completed the exile. I am fully satisfied and experiencing joyfulness on seeing you."

"Those utterances of Kaikeyi with a motive to send you on exile are still hurting my heart, O Best among speakers!"

"Seeing you with Lakshmana and embracing you makes me happy freed from grief just as the sun freed from mist."

"Son! I am liberated by you today, my great son, just as Kahola who was set on righteousness was liberated by Ashtavakra."

"O gentle son! I did not know that the ruler of gods had sent you for the destruction of Ravana, O excellent one."

"Rama! Kausalya will see you, as an accomplished one, as a destroyer of enemies, on returning home from the forest and will be highly rejoiced."

"On reaching the city and consecrated in the kingdom as ruler of the world, people will see you as an accomplished person."

"I desire to see you reunited with mighty Bharata who is pure and follower of dharma."

"O Gentle Rama! Fourteen years have been spent in the forest with Sita and Lakshmana after my departure from life."

"The period of your exile has been completed, my promise has been fulfilled in the battlefield and the gods have also gratified you."



Dasaratha having spoken to Rama, offered salutations with joined palms and said," You are righteous. Be gracious to Bharata and Kaikeyi also."

"O Lord! You had spoken in such a way saying 'I disown a good son and Kaikeyi' and cursed. May that dreadful curse not touch your son and Kaikeyi," said Rama.

The king (Dasharatha) saying 'so be it' and embracing Lakshmana again and saluting Rama spoke to Lakshmana as follows.

"You have served with devotion to Rama and Sita and made me very happy. By this task you have earned the merit of righteousness."

"O knower of dharma! If Rama is pleased, extensive fame as well as heaven and supreme glory will be attained on this earth."

"O Lakshmana, the enhancer of Sumithra's joy, 'Be auspicious. Rama will always remain good in the service of the three worlds."

"This Indra and also Siddhas, supreme sages who are great souls pay respects to Rama and worship him."

"O Gentle! Rama, the tormentor of enemies is the unmanifest and imperishable secret, is Brahma alone. This is created by Brahma. It is the secret in the heart of gods."

"Videha's Sita, you have also earned fame by serving Rama with devotion and following the righteous path."

Having spoken like that to Lakshmana, looking at the daughter in law standing there with folded palms, Dasaratha addressed her saying," Daughter", gently and sweetly and said.

"In the event of Rama abandoning you, resentment should not be shown in this way. It is your duty to endure. Rama himself has done this to prove your purity."

"Daughter! that which you have done is a sign of your character. It is highly difficult to do. You will overshadow the future of other women."

"You need not be told about the service to your husband. Nevertheless, I am giving instruction. This Rama is supreme god for you."

Having admonished the two glowing sons, and Sita, Dasaratha went by aerial car to the world of Indra.

The best of kings, majestic and prosperous Dasharatha was delighted, bidding farewell to the sons and Sita ascended the aerial car and went to the abode of gods.  ।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेद्वाविंशत्युत्तरशततमस्सर्गः ।।  This is the end of one hundred twenty second sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.