Then righteous Rama, hearing the wailing of the people, whose eyes were dimmed with tears, remained for a moment.

Then king Kubera, son of Vysravana, Yama, with Devas, Indra of thousand eyes, Varuna, the god of waters, glorious six eyed MahaDeva, who has bull on his banner, the creator of all the worlds, foremost of creators, Brahma, all of them reached Lanka city and went towards Raghava.

Then foremost of gods adorned with ornaments in hands lifted up their long shoulders and greeted Raghava with joined palms and spoke as follows.

"You are the creator of the entire world, knowledgeable and the foremost Lord of the host of gods. How did you keep watching Sita falling into fire'?

" Among the Vasus, you are the Rtadhama and the creator of the three worlds and the first creator and selfconstituted ruler."

"You are the eighth among the Rudras, fifth among the Sadhyas, two Aswins are your ears, and the sun and moon are your eyes."

"O Tormentor of enemies! You are at the beginning and at the end of the world. You are looking like a common man would look at Sita, when she was falling into pyre."

Rama the upholder of dharma and foremost and supreme god spoke after the ruler of the world had spoken to him.

"I am Dasharatha's son, a human and thinking to be Rama. Tell me O divine creator, from where and whence I am here."

To Kakuthsa who spoke that way, creator Brahma replied, "O Lord of truthful prowess, listen to my true submission."

"You are the divine self, glorious Narayana himself, wielder of discus. You are having a single tusk and a divine boar, knower of past and present."

"You are the imperishable Brahma in the midst or end, abiding in truth. You are dharma, all pervading four shouldered Vishnu in the world."

"You are the wielder of Sarang bow, subduer of enemies, a supreme person, never faced defeat, wielder of sword, Vishnu, Krishna also and mighty."

"You are the Karthikeya, the commander of army, village headman. You are the intellect, forbearance. You are the origin and end also. You are Vamana and destroyer of demon Madhu."

"You are spoken of as the creator of Indra, Mahendra himself, Padmanabha, who puts an end to combat. You are a wonderful great sage and refuge of seekers."

"You are the self of Vedas with its thousand branches and hundred divisions. You are the beginning of the three worlds and end. You are the selfshining. You are the Siddha among the achievers and their refuge as well as their protector."

"You are the form of sacrifice ritual you are worshipped by Vasat. You are the syllable OM. Only the highest of the higher know you. You are without a beginning or end. Who you are is not known to Vedas also?"

"You are seen in cows and brahmanas. You exist in all quarters, in the sky, mountains and rivers."

"You are endowed with thousand feet, glorious, with hundred heads and hundred eyes, you sustain all beings, mountains and earth."

"Rama, at the dissolution of the earth you are seen to live on water and sustain a huge serpent. You are supporting the three worlds, the Devas, Gandharvas and Danavas."

"Rama, all gods constitute your heart, Devi Saraswathi is your tongue, the gods created by Brahma are the hair on your limbs."

"When you close your eyelids, it becomes night and when you open it becomes day. Your perfection in action are the Vedas. Without you, there is nothing."

"The total world represents your body, your firmness represents the earth, your anger is fire, your grace is nobility, a sign of Srivatsa."

"Before you took the form of Trivikrama, and took three strides, occupied the three worlds and bound the dreadful king Bali you made Mahendra as king of heaven."

"Sita is goddess Lakshmi while you are Vishnu. You are Krishna. You are the Lord of created beings. In order to put an end to Ravana, you entered the mortal body on earth."

"Rama you are the supreme and upholder of dharma. The purpose for which you are born has been accomplished. Ravana is killed. You return to your abode happily."

"O God! Your valour is wonderful, your prowess never goes in vain. Your sight is a blessing, and your praise is unfailing and not gone in vain."

"Those mortals who are devoted to you, the supreme god, will be very successful. You are eternal, supreme being. Your devotees in this world and other world will always attain the desired results."

"O Mortal! This wonderful ancient history, whoever chantssings will not experience difficulty, will attain fame and will never face insult."  ।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेविंशत्युत्तरशततमस्सर्गः ।।  This is the one hundred and twenty sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.