There upon Raghava who was quick in exhibiting his prowess started thinking with his friends looking at Ayodhya (from Pushpaka).

Then wise and energetic Rama, thinking, casting his attention on the Vanaras, spoke to Hanuman.

"Chief of monkeys! Going quickly to the king's mansion in Ayodhya try to find out about the wellbeing of the people."

"Go to Sringaberipuram which is seen from the sky, meet Guha the leader of Nishadas and tell him of my inquiry and wellbeing."

"He will be very happy to hear that I am in good health free from anxiety. He is equal to me and my friend."

"Dear Guha, the king of Nishadas will tell you the way to Ayodhya and Bharata's nature."

"Please tell Bharata my words of inquiry of his wellbeing and that having accomplished my purpose I returned with my wife and Lakshmana."

"O powerful Hanuman! you may tell him of the abduction of Vaidehi by Ravana, my friendship with Sugriva and killing of Vali in combat."

"You may tell him of the search for Mythili by you, crossing the vast never decreasing stretch of water, leaping across and finding Sita."

" Also, about my going near ocean and his (Ocean god) appearance before me, construction of the bridge killing of Ravana."

" About Mahendra accompanied by Brahma and Varuna bestowing boon and by the grace of Mahadeva and meeting my father."

"Gentle Hanuman! tell him about my coming with Sugriva the king of Vanaras, and king of Rakshasas, Vibheeshana."

"Tell him that Rama , after conquering hosts of enemies, attaining unsurpassed fame, accomplished his purpose, has returned with mighty friends."

"Listening to Bharata, and seeing his form, expression on hearing this news and knowing his intent, checking all this you may return to me."

" All the information, everything to be known by his facial colour, expression, by his speech, his intention to be ascertained truly."

"Whose mind will not be tempted at the abundance of elephants and horses of father's and grandfather's kingdom?"

"If the glorious Bharata who is an enhancer of the joy of Raghus having enjoyed the kingdom for long himself, let him rule all the entire earth it is laudable."

"Hanuman, making an effort to know his mind you ought to come quickly before we go too far a distance."

Commanded like that Hanuman went speedily taking human form to Ayodhya.

Then Hanuman rose up just like Garuda who goes at great speed to vanquish the best of serpents.

Valiant Hanuman, flying through the course of the birds, through the auspicious path of the wind god, leaping across Ganga and Yamuna, reached Sringaberipuram, saw Guha, rejoiced and thus spoke charming words.

"Your friend Rama, truly valiant one, with his wife Sita, with Lakshmana conveys his welfare to you."

"Tomorrow that is the fifth lunar day, after spending the night at sage Bharadwaja's hermitage Raghava will see you."

Highly energetic Hanuman, was thrilled, overcome with happiness (that he was able to communicate to Guha) and unmindful of the fatigue, being endowed with speed and swift movement, went up.

He saw waters associated with Parasurama, and rivers Valukini, Varuthini, and Gomathi so also fearful woods of Sala trees and thousands of people, numerous kingdoms on the way.

Speeding on the journey for long distance Hanuman, the elephant among the monkeys saw women, their sons, grand sons and the old, well decorated, sporting in the gardens which were like the gardens of Indra and the gardens of Chaitraratha of Kubera with trees and close to Nandigrama, he saw trees full of blossoms.

' At a distance of two miles from Ayodhya, Hanuman saw Bharata living in a hermitage wearing black skin of antelope, emaciated, piteous, not clean, without any cleaning of the body, affected by the separation from brother living on fruits and roots, subdued practicing austerities, following righteous practices disciplined, soul purified by meditation, like Brahmarshi in brilliance, placing your sandals on ground ruling the earth, all the four divisions free from fear on all sides, protecting the upright, ministers, priests, united with chiefs of army stood there' (reported Hanuman).

The citizens (of Ayodhya) who were lovers of virtues did not enjoy any luxuries, not inclined for pleasures as the prince himself was wearing bark of trees and skin of antelope.

Maruti's son Hanuman offered salutations to Bharata who was seen like a supreme body of dharma itself as if he was another form of dharma.

"That Kakuthsa for whom you are worrying and living as he was at Dandaka forest with bark tree fabric, and matted hair sent me to tell you about his welfare."

"O God! I will tell you some pleasant news. Give up that terrible grief. You will be reunited with your brother this moment."

"Rama killed Ravana and recovered Mythili. He, having accomplished the purpose, is coming with his mighty friends."

"Lakshmana who is endowed with extraordinary energy, and illustrious Sita accompanied by Rama will be coming as Sachi with Mahendra."

Hanuman having said that, the son of Kaikeyi was delighted and instantly fell on ground and lost senses by extreme joy.

Bharata got up in a moment and saw Hanuman, who is sweet in speech said this.

Glorious Bharata was overwhelmed with joy and embraced Hanuman and copious tears of joy born of joy.

"O Gentle Hanuman! You have come here with great compassion. Are you God or a human being? For the sweet tidings brought by you to me, I will bestow a hundred thousand cows, hundred best villages, sixteen virgin women of good conduct as wives with earrings, with shapely noses, full moon like face, golden complexioned, decked with ornaments and rich women."

Prince Bharata became ecstatic on hearing from the monkey leader about the return of Rama and that he will be able to see Rama again. With great delight he spoke to Hanuman.  ।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेष्टाविंशत्युत्तरशततमस्सर्गः ।।  This is the end of one hundred and twenty eighth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.