Swan shaped Pushpak, unsurpassed in appearance like swan, making great sound started to fly with the permission of Rama.

Then Rama, the enhancer of the joy of Raghu race casting his gaze at the moon like face of Sita spoke.

"Vaidehi, you may see the peak of Trikuta which stands on Lanka in the shape of the peak of Kailasa, constructed by Viswakarma."

"Sita, see the mire of flesh and blood of the carnage of many monkeys and Rakshasas on the battlefield."

"Broad eyed Sita, there lies Ravana, the Rakshasa king, who by virtue of boon tortured people, destroyed by me on your account."

"There lies Kumbhakarna, the night ranger killed by me, Prahastha killed by Vanaras, DhumRaksha killed by Hanuman."

"There lies Vidyunmali killed by great Sushena and Ravana's son Indrajith killed by Lakshmana in the battlefield."

"There is the Rakshasa by name Vikata killed by Angada, and Virupaksha (killed by Sugriva), Mahaparsva (killed by Rshaba), Mahodara (killed by Neela), Akampana and other Rakshasas, like Trisira killed by the mighty Hanuman and Atikaya by Lakshmana and Devanthaka (by Hanuman), and Naranthaka (by Angada)."

"Yuddhonmatta and Matta both Rakshasa chiefs, and also Nikumbha and Kumbha, sons of Kumbhakarna (killed by Hanuman and Sugriva), and Vajradamshtra and Damshtra (killed by Angada), and Maha raksha who was difficult to encounter was killed by me in the combat."

" Akampana and also Sonithaksha got killed (by Dwivida), Yupaksha and Prajaghna (by Mainda and Angada)."

"There is Vidyujihva of dreadful appearance killed, Yajnasatru killed, and the mighty Suptaghna. Similarly Suryasatru and another Rakshasa Brahmasatru were killed. in the shape of the peak of Kailasa."

"Mandodari wife of Ravana, with a thousand cowives is on the seashore surrounded by associates."

"Charming lady! You see the seashore there, where we crossed the sea that night and slept on the shore."

"Broad eyed lady! Here is the bridge built on the salty ocean by Nala, which was difficult to construct."

"Vaidehi! See the abode of Varuna, impenetrable and immeasurable roaring aloud filled with conches and oystershells."

"Mythili! See the mountain which has golden caves and has risen cleaving the ocean in order to give place for Hanuman to rest while crossing the ocean."

"Here is a cavern where all these troops were stationed before crossing the ocean. At this place Lord MahaDeva bestowed his grace on me (before construction of the bridge)."

"See in the middle of the ocean a very popular spot which is worshipped by the three worlds. It is supremely sacred known by the name Sethubandha. It is capable of removing all sins. It is here that the Rakshasa king Vibhishana came to meet me."

"Sita! You are seeing the capital of Sugriva, beautiful Kishkinda with lovely woods. Vali was killed here by me."

Sita, seeing the beautiful Kishkinda city ruled by Vali, gazing at Rama timidly and through love spoke to him.

"O King! I wish to go to the capital city Ayodhya with you, Tara and other consorts of Sugriva, and other women, surrounded by Vanara chiefs."

Vaidehi having spoken like that, Raghava replied her saying 'So be it' and Raghava stopped Pushpaka at Kishkinda, looked at Sugriva and spoke as follows.

"Sugriva, the tiger among Vanaras! Let all Vanara chiefs and all women too collected, proceed to Ayodhya. Sita desires you to go."

Sugriva the head of the monkeys said" all of you including women also have to go quickly."

When Rama of immeasurable energy had spoken in the aforesaid manner, Sugriva, the prosperous leader of Vanaras, surrounded by the monkeys entered the gynaeceum and looking at Tara said.

"Dear, you have been duly permitted by the great soul Raghava to go to Ayodhya with Vanaras and also women to gratify Mythili."

"You hasten the wives of the monkeys. Taking all of them we shall depart to Ayodhya and shall see the consorts of Dasharatha."

On hearing Sugriva's words, Tara of beautiful limbs spoke, summoning all women.

Sugriva has permitted all the Vanaras to go with wives and look at Ayodhya." Dear, some kindly act will be done for us also."

"We shall see with all the citizens, Rama's entry into Ayodhya, Dasharatha's women and the glory of Ayodhya, everything."

Duly permitted, all Vanaras wives and Tara also decorated themselves according to tradition, went around the Pushpaka and looked forward to seeing Sita.

After Rama and all others ascended and Pushpaka rose up speedily over the Rshyamuka, gazing at Rshyamuka, Rama spoke toVaidehi.

"Sita! Rshyamuka is seen covered with streaks of gold minerals, glowing like clouds with lightning."

"Here is the place I met the Vanara king Sugriva and made an agreement to put an end to Vali."

"Here is seen lovely woods and Pampa waters. I lamented here, separated from you."

"On its bank (Pampa) I saw Sabari, who was following the righteous path. Kabhanda, of eight miles long arms, was killed by me."

"Sita, here is Janasthana, where a mighty tree is seen. Oh sportive lady! There the exceptionally strong and highly energetic vulture Jatayu got killed by Ravana on account of you."

"O excellent lady! Here is the location where Khara was killed by my straight going arrows and Dushana had fallen. Here is our hermitage covered with leaves, a well known site. It is from here that Ravana had borne you away forcibly."

"Here is an auspicious, beautiful Godavari with pure water. Here is also seen the hermitage of Agastya surrounded by banana plants."

"See the glowing hermitage of the great sage Sutikshna. Vaidehi, see Sarabhanga's hermitage here, where the thousand eyed Indra, the destroyer of citadels (Purandara) had come."

"There are seen the abodes of ascetics. Here was seen by you hermitage of Atri (whose wife Anasuya you had seen) glowing like sun and fire."

"In these countries was a Rakshasa, called Viradha of gigantic size who was killed by me. There is an ascetic woman Anasuya practicing virtues whom you saw."

"O Charming lady! See the best of the mountains Chitrakuta shining there. Kaikeyi's son had come here to request me to accept the kingdom."

"Mythili! See the wonderful woods bordering beautiful Yamuna. Glorious hermitage of Bharadwaja is seen there."

"There is a sacred river Ganga where several kinds of birds frequent and are filled with trees full of blossoms."

"See this Sringaberipura. Their lives my friend Guha. Sita, several kinds of trees full of blossoms are seen on the bank of Sarayu. See the rows of sacrificial posts."

Sita! My father's capital Ayodhya is seen. We have come here. Offer your salutations."

Then all the Vanaras, Vibheeshana too and Rakshasas got up and saw the delightful city.

Then the Rakshasas, monkeys witnessed the city with rows of white mansions, with huge windows, horses, and elephants all over like Amaravati, the city of Mahendra.  ।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेषड्िवंशत्युत्तरशततमस्सर्गः ।।  This is the end of one hundred and twenty sixth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.