Having realized that Ravana has become angry, Mahaparsva of extraordinary strength, thinking of pleasing him for a while greeting him with folded palms, spoke.

"Having reached a forest inhabited by wild animals and snakes for honey, whoever does not drink the honey obtained is surely a childish one."

"O Destroyer of foes Who is there to question Lord since you are Lord? Setting your foot on the head of enemy you may sport with Sita."

"(O Ravana) of great strength Take hold of Sita forcibly like the cock, enjoy and revel with her."

"When you have fulfilled your desire, why fear? Let it happen. Let that which is yet to come, happen. You will be able to face."

"Kumbhakarna accompanied by Indrajith of extraordinary strength have the power to ward off even if Indra, armed with thunderbolt comes."

"Leaving aside charity, conciliation or even by showing dissension, the three means resorted to by the wise people, you will attain success by force."

"O Ravana of extraordinary strength We will bring all your enemies under control on their arrival here. There is no doubt."

Ravana, the king of Rakshasas feeling happy about the statement of Mahaparsva, spoke these words.

"O Mahaparsva I have certain secret that happened in the past. It was a long time ago and I shall tell you. Listen to it."

"While I was going in the sky to the abode of Grandfather Brahma, I saw a celebrated one called Punjikasthala flying concealing herself, glowing like the flame of the fire."

"Then her clothes were stripped off by me forcibly and enjoyed her. Then like a violently shaken lotus stem, she went to the abode of Brahma."

"Then the high souled Brahma happened to know about that incident, I believe. Enraged Brahma made this statement to me."

"From today onwards if you desire to resort to a woman forcefully, your head will break into a hundred pieces. There is no doubt."

"Thus, frightened on account of his curse, I do not perforce to get her to my lustrous bed."

"My speed is like that of the ocean, my movement is like that of the wind and Dasaratha's son does not know this. Therefore, he is coming to attack me."

"He is waking me up like waking up a lion sleeping in the mountain cave. Like waking up death from sleep, he is desiring to instigate me. What sort of a person is he?"

"Rama has not seen my sharp arrows in comb at that are like the forked flame like the tongues of snakes. So, he is coming towards me."

At once with thunderbolts and meteor like arrows released from my bow will blaze up Rama just like fire sticks whirled at elephants.

"Surrounded by a huge army I will split up his army like the morning Sun splits up stars with his radiance."

"Even for the thousand eyed Indra or Lord Varuna it is not possible to withstand me in combat. In the past I have won this city ruled by Kubera with huge strength."  ।।इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेत्रयोदशस्सर्गः।।  This is the end of the thirteenth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.