On hearing the statement of the Lord of Rakshasas and roaring of Kumbhakarna, looking at Ravana the king of Rakshasas, Vibheeshana said these good words appropriate of a noble person.

"O king Why have you desired Sita who has snake hood at her bosom, has poison of grief, has sharp fangs behind her gentle smile and has five fingers of her palm as five heads of snake called Sita?"

"Before the monkeys of mountain like form whose teeth and claws are like weapons reach Lanka, give away Mythili to Rama."

"Give away Mythili to Rama before he releases arrows like that of thunder bolt with the speed of wind and take away the heads of the leader."

"O King It will not be possible for either Kumbhakarna or Indrajith so also for Mahaparsva not even Mahodara, so also for Nikumbha or Kumbha and Athikaya to face Rama in combat."

"Rama's arrows will not leave you with life even if you are guarded by Sun or wind god, not even if you sit on the lap of Indra or death god or even if you enter the sky or under water."

After hearing the words said by Vibheeshana, Prahastha spoke these words, we do not know the fear of gods or Rakshasas or anyone.

"We are not afraid of Yakshas, Gandharvas, or even Nagas. We have no fear of birds or reptiles. What fear can we have of the king's son, Rama?"

Then Vibheeshana, wishing the welfare of the king, intent upon Dharma, artha and kama, thinking rightly and deeply, spoke these words on hearing Prahastha's words that were not good.

"That which you intend to accomplish against Rama is not possible either for you or the king and even for Kumbhakarna and Mahodara, just as heaven is not obtained by the unrighteous people," said Vibheeshana.

"Prahastha How can you or me or all Rakshasas kill Rama who is knowledgeable of everything, just as one who is not swimming can cross the great ocean."

"One to whom righteousness is foremost, who is capable of fighting with eleven thousand warriors as charioteer, (like Dasaratha) who is a glorious scion of Ikshvaku dynasty, who is highly capable in war, in front of whom even gods got bewildered earlier. What can be done by you?"

"Prahastha Sharp arrows of Rama fixed with feathers of Kanka birds are dangerous arrows. They will tear your body and penetrate. What are you boasting yourself?"

"Prahastha Before the lifethreatening sharp arrows which have the speed of a meteor released by Rama penetrate and tear your body, why are you boasting yourself?"

"Either Ravana or exceptionally strong Trisirsha, or even Nikumbha son of Kumbahakarna, or Indrajith are not capable of opposing Rama who is equal to Indra in war. How can you?"

"Either by Devanthaka or Naranthaka, in the same way the great soul Athiratha or Akampana, who is of mountainlike size, will not be able to stand against Raghava in war."

"This king who is by nature violent and acts without thinking about being an addict to seven vices, is destroying Rakshasas. You are also attending to him calling yourself as friends but like enemies."

"This king is entwined by a fearsome and extremely strong thousand hooded snake endowed with extraordinary energy at present. Lift him up and relieve him."

"The king will have to be protected by all friends joined together whose wishes have been gratified even by catching him by his hair forcibly just as a man surrounded by a devil of terrific strength is pulled out by his hair."

"He is going to fall into the ocean called Rama to be destroyed, engulfed in the pit of the shape of Kakutstha Rama, the underworld. It is proper for all of us to join and make him free."

"I tell these good words embodying my opinion. Let the king's wife be given away for the good of the Rakshasas, their dear ones, for the capital and the king."

"One who is a minister should advice after ascertaining the strength of the foe and his own strength so also one's own growth (in strength) and fall in strength (of foe) and advice that which is conducive to the king's welfare."  ।।इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेचतुर्दसस्सर्गः।।  This is the end of the fourteenth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.