When wise Vibheeshana, the brother of Ravana was assured of security by Raghava, he looked around the ground and prepared (to descend).

Righteous Vibheeshana descended from the sky and fell at the feet of Rama accompanied by his devotees happily (considering it to be inappropriate to come with foot down he came straight down with his body).

Thereafter Vibheeshana and the four Rakshasas who sought shelter prostrated lying at the feet of Rama expressing their duty, duly and placing confidence in Rama who spoke these words showing extreme joy.

"I am Ravana's younger brother. Having been put to shame I came to seek protection from you who are the protector of all beings " (Vibheeshana said to Rama)."

"Leaving Lanka, my friends and my wealth I came to you. Now my life, kingdom and welfare are at your disposal."

"On hearing those words (of Vibheeshana) that were soothing to him as if he drank (Vibheeshana's love) with his both eyes, Rama asked Vibheeshana to truly relate the strength as well as weakness of the Rakshasas."

Then the Rakshasa (Vibheeshana) having heard that Rama of unwearied action would save him proceeded to speak out about the strength of Ravana.

"Oh Prince, by virtue of a boon granted by Brahma, the selfborn to the tenheaded Ravana, he cannot be killed by Gandharvas, Rakshasas and by all beings."

"My elder brother, the one who is younger to Ravana is a highly valiant one endowed with great prowess. He is Kumbhakarna and equal to Indra in war."

"Rama You might have heard of Prahastha who the commander in chief of his (Ravana's) army is by whom Manibhadra (Kubera's Commander of Army) was defeated in a comb at in Kailas (the abode of Siva)."

"He (Ravana's eldest son) who is possessed of Iguana skin on his hands (to protect), and with a shield that cannot be pierced and who remains unseen in comb at wielding a bow is Indrajith."

"Raghava Indrajith strikes when caught by a network of foes in war by becoming invisible because of satisfying fire god."

"Mahodara, Mahaparsva, Akampana are Rakshasas who are like the guards of the world. They are the commanders of his (Ravana's) army."

"Thousands of Rakshasas inhabit the city of Lanka living on flesh and blood and changing their form at will."

"The unassailable rulers of the world and even celestial beings have been shattered by Ravana accompanied by the Rakshasas."

Rama of mighty prowess having heard everything from Vibheeshana, examining in his mind, spoke.

"Vibheeshana Those actions resorted to by Ravana which have been spoken by you in essence are known to me."

"By Killing the tenheaded Ravana along with Prahastha and relatives I will make you the king. I am telling you, this is true."

"Even if Ravana enters the hell or underground or the abode of Brahma the creator, I will not let him be alive."

"I vow upon my three brothers that I will not enter Ayodhya without putting an end to Ravana along with his people, sons and relatives."

After having heard the words of Rama of untiring in action, Vibheeshana of righteous nature, started to speak with his head bent down (in reverence).

"I will render assistance with all my strength for storming Lanka, for killing the Rakshasas and for the army to enter."

When Vibheeshana had spoken in that manner, Rama was pleased and embraced him. He called for Lakshmana to get water from the ocean (for consecration).

"I am pleased with this highly intelligent Vibheeshana, a respectable one. I will coronate him at once as king of Rakshasas."

(Rama) having spoken that way, Saumithri crowned Vibheeshana as crowned king on the command of Rama amid Vanara army chiefs.

At that instant the Vanaras jumped, moving about exhibiting their joy on witnessing great Rama's grace saying "Good, good."

Hanuman and Sugriva enquired of Vibheeshana as to how to cross this ocean that is imperturbable along with the entire lot of energetic Vanara army.

"What strategy should we adopt to cross this abode of Varuna, the Lord of rivers and streams with the entire army of Vanaras?" (Hanuman and Sugriva asked Vibheeshana).

(Hanuman) having asked so, righteous Vibheeshana said, "O king Raghava We ought to go and seek refuge from the god of the ocean."

"This immeasurable great ocean was excavated by Sagara (A King of the Ikshvaku dynasty). The great ocean needs to do the task of Rama who is of the same race."

Vibheeshana having spoken in that manner, Sugriva accompanied by Lakshmana reached near Rama.

Thereafter broadnecked Sugriva started to communicate to Rama the advice of Vibheeshana about Sagara.

To Rama who was by nature righteous the advice (of Vibheeshana) was pleasing. To the brilliant Lakshmana of skilful action, to Sugriva the king of monkeys, Rama said smilingly.

"Lakshmana This advice of Vibheeshana is pleasing to me. Sugriva is learned, and you are always capable of good advice. That which appeals to both of you, and which is meaningful may be informed to me."

Heroic Rama having said that way to both, Lakshmana and Sugriva replied thus respectfully following tradition (with folded hands).

"O Raghava, the tiger among kings Why will this good advice given to us at this time by Vibheeshana be not pleasing?" Sugriva and Lakshmana said to Rama."

Without building a bridge over this terrific ocean, the abode of Varuna, it is not possible to cross over to Lanka even for Indra, suras or Asuras.

"Valiant Vibheeshana's words are true. Let us proceed and let us not waste time. Let us request Sagara to help the army to be able to proceed to Lanka ruled by Ravana (Sugriva and Lakshmana said to Rama)."

Then when they (Sugriva and Lakshmana) said so to Rama, he sat on Kusa grass mat on the shore of the ocean just as fire stayed in the sacrificial altar.  ।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेएकोनविंशस्सर्गः ।।  This is the end of the nineteenth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.