Thereafter, Rama uttered, "I shall make you dry up to the underworld", to the ocean that made his terrific presence.

"O Ocean When your water is dried up to the core by my arrows, huge sand will appear."

"O Ocean, now the monkeys will go to the other side of the shore on your drying up with all the creatures inhabiting you by the rain of arrows showered by me."

"You, who are the abode of demons are not aware of my valour and prowess. You are not aware of the sorrow that you will face from me."

Rama proceeded to stretch the mighty bow that resembled the rod of punishment of Brahma energized by Brahma and released that best of bows.

When Rama released the arrows from the bow, at once the sky to the earth including mountains trembled.

Then darkness engulfed the world, the directions were not noticeable and further the rivers were agitated.

The Sun and moon moved obliquely (from south to North) along with the stars. On account of the darkness that covered even the sun was not shining. The sky lighted by the meteors shone and unparalleled thunder shot forth.

Then terrific wind blew breaking forth the clouds, which is an abode of cold water, taking them away in upward direction breaking trees.

Huge clouds collected were moving at extraordinary speed in the sky breaking mountain peaks. Those clouds in the sky sent forth fire of lightning making a loud sound.

The creatures like humans etc. That could be seen and those that could not be seen like devils and ghosts remained still out of fear. Few other creatures came out of their place even though it was cold. Some were thrown off from their habitation in fear although they were together.

There after those waves of water with its creatures, serpents and demons were at once thrown off at terrific speed that was unprecedented. They were thrown beyond a yojana by the high tides.

Rama the destroyer of foes did not attempt at the ocean that went far from the boundary, which was transgressing and overweening.

Then Sagara, the Lord of the ocean himself rising like the Sun over the mighty Meru Mountain rose from the middle of the ocean.

Then the Lord of the Ocean shining like the Vaidurya stone decked in pure gold as if blazing appeared along with serpents.

Clad in red coloured robes, endowed with lotus petal like eyes having a wonderful wreath of diverse flowers on head, decked in shining ornaments of polished gold encrusted with precious gems from his own territory, he resembled the Himalayan Mountain with minerals. He had a hanging pearl necklace in the centre of his bosom shedding white lustre that resembled the Kausthuba of Lord Vishnu. With several tides moving near, and multitude of tides reaching the clouds threatening, surrounded by Goddesses of several forms and deities of important rivers like Ganga and Sindhu, the valiant Lord of the ocean greeted with folded palms and spoke these words to Rama who was wielding an arrow in his hand.

"Noble Rama Earth, wind, space, water, and fire, the five elements remain in their path strictly following their nature."

"I am fathomless and as such not capable of being swum across as it is my nature too. My fording will be a deviation. I proclaim to you (how you can cross)."

"O Lord of the land Out of desire or covetousness or even out of fear I will not be able to solidify the water infested with poisonous animals."

"O Rama I shall arrange a base in such a mode, by means of which the entire army of Vanaras can cross over the passage and I will also be seizing the poisonous animals and not be aggressive."

Then Rama said, "O abode of Varuna, listen to me. In which location should I allow this unfailing mighty arrow to descend?"

On hearing the question of Rama, the mighty ocean seeing the brilliant arrow spoke these words to him.

"To my north there is a holy place called Drumakulya, famous like you, and you have scope to act there (to descend the arrow)."

"Marauders of terrific action, who are enemies of gods whose chief is Abhiras, live there drinking my (ocean) water performing sinful acts."

"Rama I cannot tolerate the touch of ones who are sinful in action. Therefore your (of descending this arrow down) mighty unfailing arrow can be released on them."

On hearing the words of the request of Sagara and on account of seeing him, Rama let off the supreme arrow glowing (on the marauders).

By the letting down of the dart that resembled the glow of Indra that part of the land was indeed popularly known as Marakantara (Marwar and Bikaner region of Rajasthan).

At that part of the earth that was creviced by the piercing of the dart, water came out from the underworld.

That well (hole created by the dart) came to be known as Vrana. The water springing out of it forever is like sea water.

A crack caused in the ground by letting off the dart produced terrific sound and by that, the water in the cavities of the ground dried up.

Marukantaram is famous in the three worlds. Dasaratha's Rama, who is learned and has the valour of gods made the cavities dry and gave a boon.

By virtue of Rama's boon Maru became a beautiful land with tender grass for cows, with less diseases, very ideal for fruits, roots, and juicy foods, for plenty of milk, and suitable for fragrance, diverse kinds of medicinal herbs. Endowed with these virtues it became a holy and auspicious place.

Thereafter when that land of Drumakulyam was burnt (by Rama's arrow) the Lord of rivers looked at Rama who was learned in all sastras spoke these words.

"Noble Rama This prosperous one named Nala is the son of Vishwakarma. Since he has obtained boons from his father, he is equal to his father in architecture."

"This monkey is full of zeal. He will build a bridge over me, and I will bear it. In that way he is like his father."

Having spoken in that way, the Sea God disappeared. Nala, the foremost of vanaras, got up there after and spoke these words to mighty Rama.



This fearsome ocean of mighty Sagara (dug by Sagara) then allowed a passage for Rama, out of fear of punishment and also to witness the building of a bridge.

"On the Mandara mountain Vishwakarma gave a boon to my mother. I am that Vishwakarma's own son, and I am like him at work by that cause. I have put in my memory all about the ocean. I am aware of the truth of the ocean. I could not speak of my qualities unless questioned. I can build a bridge over the abode of Varuna.Right away let the Vanara leaders get the material required for building the bridge (said Nala)."

Then directed by Rama the Vanara troop leaders in hundreds and thousands sprang up gladly all over the huge forest.

Mountain like bodied Vanara bulls there upon started collecting roots of trees from the foot of mountain and moved them into the sea.

The Vanaras brought sala, asvakarna, dhava, bamboo, kutaja arjuna, palmira, tilaka, trisaira, bilva, saptaparni trees karnikara plants with blossoms, mango trees and ashoka trees and dumped into the ocean.

Lifting some trees with roots and some without roots like the staff of Indra's flag, Vanaras hurled down the trees into the sea.

They brought palmira, dadima, coconut, karira, bakula and nimba trees and dropped all of them into the ocean.

The Vanaras of huge body size and strong like elephants collected stones and mountains, lifted them, and transported into the sea.

At once the water threw up (by dropping the mountains) rose, touching the sky and spreading.

On account of throwing into the sea it got stirred up Others held the rope over a hundred yojanas in breadth (to make it even).

Nala started the task of building the huge bridge in the centre of the ocean with Vanaras.

Others held sticks and some held logs of wood and reeds following the command of Rama, hundreds of Vanaras who looked like clouds and mountain tops built the bridge.

The Vanaras who were like Danavas, huge mountains in size were seen seizing boulders from the mountain, the trees with blossoms, and creepers for binding the bridge and running.

By hurling off the mountains in that lofty ocean and throwing stones, a tumultuous sound arose.

Elephants like monkeys rejoiced over building speedily fourteen yojanas the distance of the bridge on the first day.

In the same order the Vanaras of fierce bodies and extremely strong ones soon built twenty yojanas on the second day.

Endowed with huge body that way the Vanaras built extremely fast, twenty one yojanas on the third day.

There upon at once Vanaras of great speed built twenty two yojanas on the fourth day.

Similarly, on the fifth day the Vanaras endowed with great impetus built twenty three yojanas and crossed Mount Suvela.

Nala the son of Vishwakarma, the foremost of the Vanaras and strong like his father built the bridge in the sea.

The bridge was built on the sea, an abode of crocodiles, was auspicious, glorious, and looked like the street in space (milky path).

The Gandharvas, gods and even siddhas felt happy and reached their stationed in the sky to see the wonderful bridge.

Gods and Gandharvas witnessed the bridge built by Nala that was ten yojanas in width and hundred yojanas in length.

The monkeys were jumping about here and there roaring (in joy). All creatures witnessed the bridge that was inconceivable, marvellous, thrilling, and impossible to build constructed in the sea.

The glorious Vanaras in thousands of crores reached the other side of the sea from the bridge constructed in the great sea.

That huge bridge was well built, magnificent, evenly built, and extensive and looked charming like the partition in a woman's hair.

There upon Vibheeshana holding the mace stood on the other side of the ocean along with his friends to slay the enemies.

Sugriva addressed Rama of truthful valour and said, "You mount on heroic Hanuman, let Lakshmana climb on Angada. These Vanaras will hold you up in the sky and assist you to cross the ocean."

Accompanied by Lakshmana and joined together with Sugriva, glorious and righteous Rama walked in front of the army.

While some monkeys walked in the middle some went in the side, some others were falling down in water (for the want of space to walk) some others went like birds in the path of the sky.

The terrific sound caused by the frightening advancement of massive monkey troops the sound of the ocean got drowned.

The Vanara army having crossed the bridge of Nala by the king's order settled on the other shore that was filled with several roots and fruits.

At once the gods, siddhas, charanas and sages came towards Rama looking at his wonderful and most difficult action and sprinkled auspicious water on him individually. (As a mark of worship and blessing).

"O Rama the Lord of human beings Let you win over enemies and rule the land for ever." Thus, hailing Rama who is worshipped by humans as well as gods, was worshipped with auspicious words (by the aforesaid gods, siddhas and charanas).  ।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेद्वाविंशस्सर्गः ।।  This is the end of the twenty second sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.