Perceiving the portents, Rama spoke these words embracing Saumithri who was aware of the portents.

"Lakshmana Arrange a place in this forest where there is cool water and fruits for the battalions of the army, we shall remain (alert)."

"Dreadful warriors, Bears, monkeys, and Rakshasas will be slain, and I foresee that which bodes destruction of people."

"The wind is blowing mixed with dust, even the earth is cracking, mountain tops are shaking, and huge trees are breaking and falling down."

"Clouds resembling raw flesh in colour, are making harsh frightening sounds, and rain mixed with drops of blood."

"The twilight in red sandal colour is very frightening. The Sun is blazing, raining masses of fire in variegated colours."

"The wild animals all over have a piteous look and wailing in low tone standing opposite the Sun is indicating fear."

"The moon devoid of glow even in the night is like the Sun with black rays around and red aura behind (the black)."

"Lakshmana the white Sun is appearing in copper colour around with black colour in the centre which had not been seen before. It is small and dreary."

"Lakshmana the stars devoid of brightness are indicating as though it is the time of dissolution of the universe?"

"The crows, hawks and eagles are falling down like small animals. Also, the jackals are creating fear by making howls."

"The earth will turn into a mass of flesh and blood and will be covered by the mountains and tridents hurled by Vanaras and Rakshasas."

All the Vanaras turning their direction will go immediately and now itself, swiftly to the city ruled by Ravana (said Rama to Lakshmana).

Rama, the subduer of enemies in war, a celebrated one having spoken this way proceeded towards Lanka going in front wielding a bow.

Then Vibheeshana, Sugriva and all bulls among Vanaras determined in the matter of slaying (the enemies) went roaring.

To make Rama happy, the excessively heroic Vanaras made monkey actions. Seeing that Rama felt happy.  ।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेत्रयोविंशस्सर्गः ।।  This is the end of the twenty third sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.