Thereafter, the spies reported to the king of Lanka that Raghava had camped with an unshakable army at the Suvela mountain.

On hearing from the spies that Rama has camped with a great army, Ravana got a little panicky and said these words to Saardula.

"O Forest ranger! Your face is not as it should be and also pitiable. Hope the angry enemies have not done anything to you."

And there after questioned by him (Ravana) Saardula revealed these words overwhelmed by fear, in faint tone to the tiger among Rakshasas.

"O King! the Vanara heroes are valiant and highly powerful. They are also protected by Rama. It is not possible to spy on them."

"It is not possible to converse with them or to question and or to examine, since they are guarded all over by mountains like Vanaras."

"No sooner I entered their army, I was detected. I was forcibly seized by their guards and rolled on the ground."

"The monkeys had beaten me with fists, bitten my palms with teeth, beaten me intensely and paraded me in the army indignantly."

"With all my limbs wet with bleeding, control over senses lost, after parading, I was led to the assembly of Rama."

"While smitten by the monkeys, offering salutation with folded hands, and pleading for protection from Raghava, luckily, I am alive."

"Having filled the great ocean with rocks and stones in that way, taking position at the entrance of Lanka Rama stands equipped with arms."

"O glorious King! After releasing me, Rama is advancing into Lanka surrounded by mountains like a monkey army in the form of Garuda."

"Before Rama reaches the boundary, the wall, do one thing quickly. Either give away Sita or set out to give a good war."

"Having heard what has been said by Saardula, Rakshasa king reviewed in his mind and made a good statement before Saardula."

"Even if Devas, Gandharvas and Danavas come to wage war with me and even if I have threats from all worlds, I will not give away Sita."

Glorious Ravana having spoken like that, again said (to Saardula), "You moved about in the army (camp) there. Tell me who among the monkeys are warriors?"

"Gentle Saardula! Of those who are difficult to encounter, what is their description? Who are the powerful ones among them? Whose sons and grandsons, are they? You may speak."

"Likewise knowing their strengths and weaknesses from you I wish to know what to do. It is essential to know their numbers and strength before the war."

"When Ravana had spoken that way, good spy Saardula proceeded to tell these words in the presence of Ravana."

"Certainly, king Sugriva, the son of Rksharaja's, is difficult to be conquered in battle. Here is the son of Gadgada, famously called as Jambavan."

Another son of Gadgada is Dhumra. One who killed many Rakshasas is Hanuman, the son of Kesari, who is the son of Brhaspati.

"O king! Here is a heroic and righteous Sushena, the son of the Lord of death (Yamadharma). Here is Dadhimukha son of noble moon."

"Vanaras Sumukha, Durmukha and Vegadarsi are surely created by Brahma in the Vanara form of DeathGod."

"The firegod's son indeed is the army chief known as Nila, and here is windgod's son widely known as Hanuman."

"The indomitable and powerful young Angada is the grandson of Indra, the strong Mainda and Dwivida are both the twin sons of Ashwini Devas, Gaja, Gavaksha, Gavaya, Sarabha and Gandhamadana are the five sons of Yama, the god of death. There are ten crores of heroic and prosperous Vanaras desiring to wage war who are the sons of gods. It is not possible to speak of the remaining ones", said Saardula to Ravana."

"That young one whose build is like a lion is Dasaratha's son who slayed Dushana, even Khara, like wise Trisira."

"Viradha and even Kabhanda who was like the Lord of death were killed by Rama. Perhaps there is none equal to Rama in valour in this world."

"It is not even possible to recount the virtues of Rama who killed all the Rakshasas approaching Janasthana."

"Here is righteous Lakshmana, who is like a bull (foremost) resembling a proud elephant. Even Indra will not be alive with in the range of his arrows when he strikes."

"Here are Swetha and Jyothirmukha sons of Sun god Hemakuta another son of Varuna Nala the foremost among the monkey heroes is the valiant son of Vishwakarma and Durdhara of swift action, the son of Vasu."

"Here is your brother Vibheeshana the jewel among Rakshasas, who remains as a wellwisher of Rama and has received the city of Lanka (to whom Rama has offered Lanka)."

"I have described to you everything about the Vanara strength stationed on Suvela mountain. You may decide the rest of the task to be done."  ।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेत्रिंशस्सर्गः ।।  This is the end of the thirtieth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.