Sugriva the king of men and monkeys, Hanuman the son of wind god, Jambavan the king of Bears, Vibheeshana, Vali's son Angada, Sarabha, accompanied by his kin Sushena, Mainda, Dwivida, Gaja, Gavaksha, Kumuda, the wise Nala and Panasa arrived at the enemy city and collected together thought like this.

"This Lanka city ruled by Ravana is seen. It appears that this city is unconquerable to Devas, demons and Gandharvas also by the immortals."

"Rakshasa king Ravana is ever present here. Prepare yourself to achieve success in the mission and determine your duty."

While they were speaking like that to one another, Ravana's brother Vibheeshana spoke courteously, words full of meaning.

"My ministers Anala, Sarabha, Sampathi and also Praghasa went to Lanka and saw it and returned."

All of them assumed the form of birds and went deep into Lanka, saw the enemy strength and arrangements made by the enemy and turned up.

"Rama! Alas, they told me everything of the way evil minded Ravana's army is organized as it is. Listen to me."

"Powerful Prahasta stands at east gate with army, Mahaparsva and Mahodara of great valour are at the south gate."

"Ravana's own son, Indrajith stands at the west gate surrounded by numerous Rakshasas collected together wielding sharp swords, bows, spears, arrows and darts and many kinds of weapons."

"Ravana himself stands at the north gate of Lanka, highly agitated surrounded by many thousands of Rakshasas wielding weapons."

"Virupaksha stands in the middle of Lanka wielding spears, swords, bows and arrows accompanied by mighty army."

All our ministers immediately returned back after keenly observing the city of Lanka in this way.

"Elephant army of ten thousand, similarly ten thousand charioteers, horse riders in twenty thousand, more than a crore foot soldiers, mighty strong and valiant warriors, night ranger's beloved to Ravana, the king of Rakshasas were staying close and serving."

"O! Lord of men! For the sake of assisting one Rakshasa in war ten lakhs of Rakshasas are staying at his service."

Mighty armed Vibheeshana revealed to Rama all the information that was told to him by ministers.

Again, Vibheeshana, the prosperous brother of Ravana, spoke to Rama everything about Lanka made known to him by the ministers. Vibheeshana looking at the lotus petal eyed Rama, intending to please Rama, spoke.

"Rama! Earlier when Ravana launched an offensive battle against Kubera, sixty thousand Rakshasas who were equal to him in valour, brilliance, courage, and with respect sallied forth the proud, the evil minded Ravana."

"Here, in this case do not be angry. I am telling out of my duty and not out of indignation or to cause anger or fear in you. You are capable of resisting even Devatas."

"You also have these Vanara armies surrounded by four kinds of army, elephants, chariots, cavalry and foot soldiers."

When Ravana's younger brother spoke in that way Raghava instructed the army to attack the enemy.

"Let the Vanara leader Neela along with Vanaras stay at the east gate of Lanka and give fight to Prahasta."

"Let Vali's son the mighty and powerful Angada along with army crush Mahaparsva and Mahodara at the south gate."

"Let Hanuman, the wind god's son of unimaginable prowess, enter the west gate along with numerous Vanaras and press against the enemy."

"That Ravana who is harming Daityas and Danavas, and great souls following wicked practices and armed by the boons is oppressing all people wandering all over. I, with Lakshmana, have determined to persecute and kill him and force my entry to the north gate."

"Mighty strong Sugriva, valorous Jambavan, the ruler of Vanaras and Vibheeshana, brother of Ravana will remain at the middle of Lanka and fight."

"In the battle like this at present Vanaras should not be in the semblance of humans. Let this be our sign."

"To know our own people the Vanaras are the sign of recognition Chivalrous Lakshmana, my brother, similarly five of us and our friend Vibheeshana, these seven people alone will wage war in human form."

Wise Rama having spoken like that to Vibheeshana for accomplishing the task, looking at the beauty of Suvela mountain slopes, climbed up and went.

Thereafter great Rama with the army spread all over the ground, felt happy at heart, and resolved to succeed went up to Lanka.  ।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेसप्तत्रिंशस्सर्गः ।।  This is the end of the thirty seventh sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by Sage Valmiki.