Then the Rakshasas proceeding to Ravana's abode informed that Rama along with the vanaras have occupied the whole of Lanka.

On knowing that Lanka is occupied, the night ranger Ravana, became very furious and doubled the forces of Lanka for the protection and went to the top of Lanka palace.

He observed a countless number of Vanara troops spread all over Lanka, mountains, and forests.

Seeing the Vanaras occupying the entire earth, Ravana thought of destroying and started thinking.

Ravana, thinking over for long, picking up courage, saw Rama's Vanaras with thoughtful eyes.

Raghava accompanied by the army happily went near and witnessed Lanka filled with Rakshasas all over.

The son of Dasaratha saw Lanka decorated with flags and posts and thinking of Sita he became very worried.

"Here (Lanka) is the daughter of Janaka, immersed in sorrow because of me, tormented and emaciated without food and struggling."

Thinking of Vaidehi again and again, who is pained, Rama ordered the Vanaras to kill the enemies immediately.

Ordered in that way by Rama, who does not cause sorrow, the monkeys roared like lions getting ready for war on hearing Rama's words.

The monkey troops thought of crushing Lanka with their fists and mountain peaks.

Holding the mountain peaks, huge trees of many kinds, the Vanara leaders stood ready to fight.

To make Rama happy, all the Vanara army divided into groups and started ascending the boundary (of Lanka) walls the king of Rakshasas was witnessing.

Vanaras of copper colour faces and golden coloured ones, dedicating their lives for the sake of Rama holding Sala trees and rocks went towards Lanka.

With the means of mountain peaks, as well as their fists, the Vanaras scaled the boundary walls and gateways of the city.

The Vanaras started filling the moats with soil, pure water, logs of wood, grass, and mountain peaks.

Then the Vanaras in thousands and crores ascended Lanka.

The Vanaras started breaking the golden gateways and crushing them which were like peaks of Kailasa mountain.

Jumping here and there like huge elephants, the Vanaras roaring like lions went into Lanka.

"Victorious is Sri Rama, who is exceedingly strong and Lakshmana who is endowed with supreme strength. Victorious is Sugriva the king of Vanaras who is protected by Raghava on all sides."

Shouting in that manner, the monkeys who could change their form at their will started roaring and rushed towards the defensive walls.

Veerabahu, Subahu, Nala and the foremost of the Vanara leaders storming the boundary walls in the meantime went inside and stationed at the northeast gate.

Kumuda, surrounded by ten crores of mighty monkeys, who appeared like conquerors, stationed at the east gate.

Praghasa the broad shouldered Vanara, was surrounded by Panasa for assisting him who encamped surrounded by many.

Valiant Satabali with twenty crores of monkeys stood besieging the south gate.

Sushena, father of Tara, (Vali's wife) the mighty, stood with sixty crores of monkeys at the western gate.

Reaching the north gate, Sri Rama along with Saumithri, blockading the gate stood Sugriva the Lord of monkeys.

Gavaksha of gigantic body and fierce appearance, along with one crore of Golangula species of monkeys endowed with extraordinary virility stood by the side of Sri Rama.

Accompanied by a crore of Bears of redoubtable fury, Dhumra (brother of Jambavan), an exterminator of foes endowed with extraordinary valour stood by Rama's side.

Vibheeshana with defensive clamour, of extraordinary virility accompanied by his mighty ministers, stood there with his mace in hand.

Gaja, Gavaksha, Gava, Sarabha, Gandhamadana stood protecting the monkey troops wandering all over.

Thereafter Ravana, the Lord of Rakshasas overcome by fury ordered all his forces to advance.

Hearing the command issued from Ravana's mouth, immediately a terrific roar was raised by the night rangers.

Then shone the white discs like the moon beaten by the Rakshasas with gold sticks making terrific sound.

With hundred thousand Rakshasas blowing sonorous conchs, with the wind from their mouths, terrific noise arose.

The night rangers with their brilliant dark limbs, with conchs, were like dark clouds provided with armour with flashes of lightning and accompanied by herons.

Urged by Ravana, the army then joyfully rushed forth swiftly like a great ocean at the time of universal destruction.

Thereafter the Vanara army emitted a sound that filled all sides of Malaya Mountain, its major and minor caves.

By the blast of conchs and roll of drums, and roar of lions of Vanara and Rakshasa forces it resounded all over the earth, sky and up to the ocean.

The trumpeting of the elephants, the neighing of horses, the clatter of the wheels of the chariots and the shout of Rakshasas resounded in the air.

In the meantime, dreadful conflict arose all over between Rakshasas and Vanaras, which was like the conflict between Devas and asuras earlier.

Vowing their own prowess, the Rakshasas began to strike the Vanaras with maces, flaming javelins, tridents, and pikes fiercely.

"May the vanara king,triumphant Sugriva be victorious", thus sounded the cry of vanaras in the battlefield.

Vanaras in the same manner attacked the Rakshasas, with trees and mountains, swiftly and with their nails and teeth.

Standing on the walls, the redoubtable Rakshasas, pierced the Vanaras with swords, dreadful Bhindipalas.

The vanaras jumping up dragged the Rakshasas stationed on the boundary wall down to the ground.

The conflict that happened between the Rakshasas and Vanaras was amazing and intense and left a mire of flesh and blood.  ।। इत्यार्षेश्रीमद्वाल्मीकिरामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेद्विचत्वारिंशस्सर्गः ।।  This is the end of the forty second sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.