On seeing her husband killed and also mighty Lakshmana, Sita became emotional in intense sorrow and cried piteously.

"Whoever was capable of predicting the future have said that I will be the mother of sons and not become a widow. Now if Rama is dead, they become liars."

"Whoever conducted sacrificial ceremonies and are knowledgeable of sastras have told me that I would be consort. They are all liars now as Rama is killed."

"The astrologers, brahmins who have promised me to be auspicious and all the wise who have spoken are liars if Rama is killed."

"Whoever has told me that I will be the wife of a man of great prowess, worshipped by husband, and all wise men are liars if Rama is killed."

"Those virtuous lotus marks that a woman has on their feet to become crowned queen of a kingdom are seen in my feet."

"Those inauspicious signs found in unlucky and widowed women are difficult to find in me. I do not see any such signs in me."

"Characteristic marks of lotuses, unfailing in their effect (truthful) predicted are all false if Rama is killed."

"My hair is fine and dark, my eyebrows are uniform and not joined, my shanks are round devoid of hair, and my teeth are closely set."

"My temporal bones, eyes, hands, feet, ankles, thighs are even, and my fingers are fleshy and round with nails proportioned and bright."

"My breasts are well formed and developed, the nipples are depressed and joined, the navel is deep, and the surrounding part is fleshy."

"My complexion is like the shine of a gem. My hair on the skin is soft. When I touch the ground with my ten fingers and toes, it is said to leave auspicious marks."

"My palms and feet placed together have no space which are auspicious marks and brahmins have said that my gentle smile is also a mark of auspiciousness."

"The prediction of astrologers that I will be consecrated with my husband and all that is falsified."

"Having gained Janasthana and crossing the ocean which is impossible knowing about my whereabouts and getting me is impossible since the brothers have been killed by the maya of Indrajith whose footprints are like a cow's hoof."

"Raghavas knew to use Varuna's weapons, fire god's weapons, Indra's also, even wind god's and Brahma's weapons. Why have they not used?"

"Indrajith remaining invisible in war by conjuring could kill my husband who is equal to Indra in valour. Rama and Lakshmana! I am orphaned now."

"Even if the enemy is endowed with speed of thought, if he comes in the range of Rama's sight, he will not go alive."

"Rama along with Lakshmana has fallen in the battlefield. Time spirit is too heavy and capable of doing anything, so difficult to conquer."

"When I think of Rama or even great warrior Lakshmana, or my mother or myself I am not so sad as when I think of my motherinlaw who is an observer of austerity."

"She will also be worried and wait for Rama who has completed his vow (for fourteen years) and Lakshmana and Sita to come."

Looking at Sita, worried, Trijata said 'Devi, do not despair. Your husband is alive'.

"O Devi! Rama and Lakshmana are alive. I see great reasons for this."

"If a husband ceases life in war, their face will not have an angry look or happy appearance."

"Vaidehi! Indeed, this aerial car called Pushpaka which is an auspicious one would not have brought you if they are ceased of life."

"The army chief killed, the interest of the troop lost, Pushpaka will move about without making an effort like the ship which lost the helmsman."

"O Lady, given to austerities! These monkeys are guarding Kakuthsa as proclaimed by me lovingly. Do not be confused. They are safe."

"This army is not doubting, not perturbed also, that they are killed. They are guarding the Kakutsthas lovingly. I am telling you."

"I have not uttered untruth earlier nor shall I do now. Indeed, you have found entry into my mind being a woman of good disposition."

"These two are not capable of being won in war even by gods or demons. On observation of the indications by me I am making you realize."

"O Mythili! Even though both of them have fallen and unconscious under arrows their body splendour has not diminished. You may see."

"Normally when we see men who have ceased life and stopped breathing their features are unappealing."

"O Janaka's daughter! You give up grief and delusion about Rama and Lakshmana. They are alive, no doubt."

Sita who was like deity, on hearing the words of consolation, spoken by Trijata, greeted Trijata with palms together.

Then Trijata took Sita in the Pushpaka chariot endowed with the speed of mind and entered Lanka.

Thereafter Sita along with Trijata went to Pushpaka. Making Sita to get down, rakshasi also entered Ashoka grove.

Having entered the Rakshasa's pleasure garden which had many trees, Sita gave way to intense sorrow having keenly observed the king's sons.  ।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेअष्टचत्वारिंशस्सर्गः ।।  This is the end of the forty eighth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.