Vajradamshtra, the mighty Rakshasa became enraged with the destruction of his army and victory of Angada.

Stretching his terrific bow which had the splendour of Indra's bow he (Vajradamshtra) showered shafts at the army troops of Vanaras and assailed them.

Seated firmly on the chariots the chiefs and heroes of Rakshasas also fought steadily with different weapons in the combat.

The best of Vanara warriors also gathered together with rocks in hand contended.

Then in that battle the Rakshasas went on hurling thousands of missiles at the chiefs of Vanaras.

Heroic Vanaras who resembled elephants in rut showered mountains and trees and huge rocks at Rakshasas.

Between the heroes fighting the battle, who never returned, Great War continued between Rakshasas troops and Vanaras.

There lay strewn some monkeys and Rakshasas also with severed heads, broken feet, with many weapons mangled with bodies, bathed in blood, arms and feet looped to necks devolving as prey to buzzards, vultures and crows surrounded.

Then in the battlefield, the timid vanaras and even rakshasas with their arms and heads cut off, bodies wounded allover dropped down.

Thereafter Rakshasas were killed by Vanaras as Vajradamshtra kept looking at them and the Rakshasas ran from there.

Struck by monkeys the Rakshasas were in fear. Seeing the Rakshasas Vajraddamshtra's eyes turned red in anger with bow in hand penetrating the Vanara troops terrifying them.

Valiant Vajradamshtra became very furious and pierced with arrows of plumes of buzzard which never missed target in seven, eight, nine and five Vanaras at a time.

Struck with fear the Vanaras sought the protection of Angada just as people seek protection of Brahma, the creator of beings.

Then the son of Vali gazing at the broken monkeys looking at Vajradamshtra in anger, faced himself.

Vajradamshtra and Angada both enraged and strode among Rakshasas and monkeys and fought like a lion and intoxicated elephant.

Then Angada endowed with great strength, pierced Vajradamshtra in his private parts with clubs used for piercing elephants.

Angada who was endowed with great strength all his limbs bathed in blood and terrific valour took hold of a huge tree and shattered Vajradamshtra.

That Rakshasa (Vajradamshtra) seeing the tree coming towards him was not bewildered. He shattered it into pieces, and it fell on the ground.

The bull among monkeys, Angada seeing the valour of Vajradamshtra seizing a huge hillock hurled at the Rakshasa making loud sounds and breaking.

The valiant Rakshasa who was not perplexed with mace in hand leaping down the chariot looking (at the hillock hurled) sat on the ground.

The hillock discharged by Angada went right in the forefront of the battle and shattered the chariot along with its wheels and pole.

Then Angada seized a huge hillock adorned with trees hurled at Vajradamshtra.

Vajradamshtra vomiting blood became unconscious and clasping his mace breathing heavily he remained senseless for a while.

The night ranger regained his senses, extremely angry, stood firmly and attacked Angada, son of Vali on his chest with his mace.

Then leaving off the mace, a dual fight started there between one another, the monkeys, and Rakshasas.

Exhausted by strain both very valiant fought like planets Angaraka and Budha and spit out blood.

Then highly energetic, bull among Vanaras, Angada, uprooting a tree full of many flowers and fruits stood there.

(The Rakshasa seized) a huge bright sword, a shield decorated with tiny bells and sword encased in hide sheath.

Then desiring victory both monkey and Rakshasa struck one another passionately in wonderful harsh ways.

Their wounds streaming blood, exhausted in the battlefield, when they rested on their knees on the ground, they were like charming Kimsuka blossoms.

Angada, the elephant among the monkeys rose up in the mere twinkling of eyes, like a serpent struck by staff glowing in his eyes.

Mighty son of Vali lopped off the great head of Vajradamshtra's with a sharpened stainless sword.

His (Vajradamshtra's) limbs bathed in blood, cut off by sword, eyeballs rolling cleft into two dropped down.

Deluded with fear, the Rakshasas seeing Vajradamshtra killed by monkeys, panic stricken, heads bent in shame, faces woebegone fled to Lanka.

Mighty son of Vali, having killed Vajradamshtra, honoured in the midst of great Vanara army was joyful surrounded like the thousand eyed Indra, the Lord of gods.  ।।इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेचतुःपञ्चाशस्सर्गः  This is the end of the fifty fourth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.