Then the king of Lanka after entering the city of Lanka, felt humiliated by Rama's arrow, vanity crushed and had lost control over his senses.

Overcome by humiliation from the high souled Rama, Ravana remained like an elephant rejected by a lion and a serpent rejected by Garuda.

The Lord of Rakshasas remained disquieted recalling the arrows of Rama which emitted light like lightning, resembling Brahmadanda.

Ravana seated on the wonderful golden magnificent throne gazing at Rakshasas spoke these words.

" All the penance which I have done, and the asceticism practised by me equal to Mahendra has become purposeless and defeated."

The dreadful words of Brahma spoken to me" know that danger from humans is coming to be true.

"I sought protection from Devas, Danavas, Gandharvas, Rakshasas and serpents but not asked for protection from humans."

"I think that Dasaratha's son Rama, a human being is about whom king Anaranya born in Ikshvaku race, who cursed me earlier saying, 'In my race will be born a man who will kill you in war, with your sons, your horses, charioteers, all army, O evil minded lowest of Rakshasas, and the vilest of Rakshasas."

"In the past, I violated Vedavathi and got cursed by her. The same Woman born as Sita, the daughter of Janaka, is a highly blessed one."

"Uma, Nandeeswara, Rambha and daughter of Varuna have cursed me like that and the prediction of those endowed with vision has been attained by me."

"Knowing all this, make effort doing what ought to be done and let the Rakshasas strive to succeed positioned on top of the gates."

"Let Kumbhakarna of unparalleled profundity, capable of crushing Devas and Danavas, who is in slumber owing to the curse of Brahma be awakened."

"Let him be instructed that Prahastha endowed with mighty prowess has been defeated and killed."

"Let the Rakshasas climb up the defensive walls and attempt to guard. Also let Kumbhakarna be aroused from sleep."

"The Rakshasa, Kumbhakarna, lost consciousness is slumbering at ease and has been sleeping for six to nine months happily."

"Deliberating like this with me, Kumbhakarna is sleeping for the ninth day from now. He may be quickly informed (aroused)."

"Endowed with broad shoulders, he is the foremost of Rakshasas. He will crush many Vanaras immediately and the two princes (Rama and Lakshmana)."

"He, (Kumbhakarna) is the foremost chief among all Rakshasas enumerated. In that way he is distinguished. But he is insensate, remains addicted always to indecent delight in the form of sleep."

" After Kumbhakarna is fully aroused, my sorrow impelled in this terrible comb at with Rama will not be there."

"What can I do if he does not assist me in such a dreadful comb at because of his weakness, even though he is equal to Indra in strength"

On listening to the Rakshasa king's words, the Rakshasas went to the abode of Kumbhakarna highly puzzled.

The Rakshasas entered the beautiful residence of Kumbhakarna which was one yojana on all sides with huge gates, taking fragrant garlands and foods (to wake up Kumbhakarna) from where they were pushed out by the breath of Kumbhakarna. The Rakshasas endowed with mighty strength pushed their way into the residence of Kumbhakarna and entered.

The tigers among Rakshasas entered the residence paved with gold and precious stones, a delightful one and saw sleeping Kumbhakarna of great prowess.

Those Rakshasas collected together started to awaken Kumbhakarna, who was like a scattered mountain in dead sleep.

The Rakshasas saw Kumbhakarna, destroyer of enemies, the tiger of the southwest, tamer of foes, with his body fully covered with bristling hair, breathing heavily like a serpent with horrible nostrils, turning back with facemouth as vast as underworld all limbs stretched out, emitting smell of fat and blood, arms adorned with gold bracelets, wearing a crown, and sleeping.

Thereafter the Rakshasas placed a heap of me at the size of Meru Mountain to please him immensely.

The tigers of the south west Rakshasas piled up a mass of marvellous food like the me at of buffaloes, swine, and antelopes.

Then the Rakshasas placed thirty three kinds of meat, pails of blood, and a variety of wines in front of Kumbhakarna.

Again, they daubed Kumbhakarna with highly fragrant sandal paste to take in fragrance, with wonderful garlands and perfumes.

They also burnt incense, sandal to send forth fragrance to gratify Kumbhakarna and thundered like clouds here and there.

They blew moon size conches shining brightly. Intolerant Rakshasas raised loud noise simultaneously.

Those night rangers drawing the limbs of Kumbhakarna pushed his arms, clapping loudly to awaken him making a sound.

On hearing the conchs, and of the clapping of arms, and thundering like a lion, the birds playing in the sky got scattered and fell.

Kumbhakarna sleeping like that, could not be awakened. Angry Rakshasas roared and hit him with mallets and maces.

Then the excited Rakshasas could not wake up Kumbhakarna happily sleeping on the ground in spite of hitting with rocks and trees and their fists.

Unable to bear the force of the breathing out of Kumbhakarna, the Rakshasas could not stand.

The Rakshasas of terrible valour resorted to abandoned drums and tom toms that way and pails of clay.

Ten thousand Rakshasas surrounded him all at once like a mass of antimony striking him and even made a loud noise. But he never responded.

They called him again and again, but he never got up. Then they made a difficult and dreadful effort approaching him.

They urged horses, elephants, camels, and donkeys to pounce on him, whipping with staff, whips, and goads.

The city of Lanka including the woods was filled with that noise. They pushed him with mallets with all their strength, but he did not wake up.

All Lanka and mountains were filled by the great noise made by the Rakshasas. Even then Kumbhakarna did not wake up.

Then was collected a thousand drums and beaten with polished gold sticks on all sides continuously.

Wrapped in sleep like that because of the spell of the curse, he had not wakened. The Rakshasas got enraged.

All the Rakshasas endowed with mighty prowess became enraged and others started to arouse with all their strength.

While some were beating the drums, some shouted at the pitch of their voice, some started pulling his hair and some bit his ears.

Some poured hundreds of pails of water into ears, distressed that he did not wake up under the spell of deep sleep.

Some had their nails fixed with mallets, letting their mallets fall on the forehead, on the chest and throw at of Kumbhakarna.

Some struck with sataghni (mace) all over his huge body fastened with cords.

A thousand elephants were made to walk over his body. Then Kumbhakarna felt the touch but did not understand.

Tormented by hunger and hit by mountain peaks and huge trees he sprang up suddenly descended and awakened.

Kumbhakarna, devoid of any beauty threw out his limbs which were like the coils of cobra and as hard as mountain tops, his mouth was unnatural like a submarine fire as he yawned.

As he yawned his mouth resembling the underworld, it was like the Sun rose over the top of Mount Meru.

As the mighty night ranger awakened and yawned continuously his breath was like wind blowing from the mountain.

As Kumbhakarna woke up he appeared like the time spirit at the time of dissolution of the universe like a rainy cloud at twilight as if seeking to consume all beings.

His huge eyes were like blazing fire dazzling like lightning glowing like two huge planets.

Thereafter having seen several kinds of food items of hogs, buffaloes he ate them.

After eating the meat and feeling thirsty, the enemy of Indra drank blood, pails of fat and wine.

There upon the night rangers realizing that he got up, came before him, and greeted him with heads bent down.

With sleepy eyes casting his glance at the night rangers looked at all of them.

He, the bull among the south west region, astonished at his awakening, soothed, and spoke to all the Rakshasas in this way.

"What have you done to wake me Hope King is fine and has no fear of danger"

"Is there any fear of some enemies Is it because of that you have woken me up Let me know."

"I will devour Rakshasa king's fear. I will eradicate even Mahendra (mountain) or alleviate fire."

"For a small reason he will not awaken me. Tell me the reason truly for waking me."

Kumbhakarna, tamer of enemies having spoken in that way in anger, Yupaksha, a minister joined palms and replied to him.

"O King! there is no danger from Devas. Only a small destruction done by a human is pressing and causing pain."

"O King! This kind of fear from humans has not arisen for us either from Daityas or Danavas."

This Lanka is seized by a mountain like army of Vanaras. By the abduction of Sita, there is little fear from Rama.

"Earlier this great city was burnt by a single Vanara who killed Prince Aksha, and his elephants and followers."

"Rakshasa king, scion of sage Paulastya, an enemy of Devatas, was let off from death by Rama who has the splendour of Sun."

"The king could escape from the verge of death and such an act was never done by Daityas or Danavas earlier in the encounter."

On hearing the words of Yupaksha, regarding the insult of his brother Kumbhakarna said this rolling his eyes.

"I will conquer now the Vanara army along with Lakshmana and Raghava in war and see Ravana."

"I will satisfy the Rakshasas with the flesh and blood of Rama and Lakshmana. You will see."

Hearing the words of the reply of Kumbhakarna, filled with arrogance and pride, Mahodara, chief of the army, submitted with folded hands and said.

"O Mighty Armed One! You hear from Ravana the advantages and disadvantages and thereafter assess the enemy to conquer."

Kumbhakarna of extraordinary energy, mighty strong, on hearing Mahodara went in surrounded by Rakshasas.

After rousing up Kumbhakarna of frightful eyes and fierce strength from sleep the Rakshasas quickly went to the abode of the ten headed king.

All those night rangers, approaching the tenheaded king seated on an excellent se at greeted with folded hands and said.

"O Rakshasa Lord! Your brother Kumbhakarna has come here. Greetings to you. Tell us what to do."

Ravana on his part said this to the Rakshasas feeling cheerful. "Honour him as propriety demands. I wish to see him."

All the Rakshasas taking leave from Ravana said this again approaching Kumbhakarna.

All the Rakshasa leaders said to Kumbhakarna," the king desires to see you. Start. Make up your mind. Be pleased to depart to your brother."

Formidable and courageous Kumbhakarna also got up from sleep saying 'yes' and rose up.

Joyful Kumbhakarna, washed his face, had a bath and being thirsty ordered a drink that can increase his strength.

By the order of Ravana hurriedly they got several kinds of wine in pots.

(Kumbhakarna) Having drunk two thousand pots of wine, slightly excited and inebriated and replenished with strength and energy was ready to depart.

Kumbhakarna surrounded by Rakshasas going to his brother's abode happily looked like the Lord of death bent on destroying the creation. He took strides which shook the earth.

Kumbhakarna went like the thousand rayed Sun illuminating the earth by his splendour brightening the royal path, greeted by a circle of Rakshasas joining palms like Indra who has done a hundred sacrifices went to the abode of selfborn Brahma.

And then the Vanaras and the leaders of the Vanara army who were present looked at the immeasurably tall form of Kumbhakarna walking through the royal path and got alarmed.

Indeed, some took refuge from Rama who could give shelter, some fell down in panic, some went in all directions in panic, and some out of fear lay down on the ground.

Oppressed with fear the Vanaras ran here and there seeing the form of Kumbhakarna that was like the peak of a mountain as if touching the selfluminous Sun, crowned and wonderful, grown in size.  ।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेषष्टितमस्सर्गः ।।  This is the end of the sixtieth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.