Hearing the lament of the Rakshasa king, Kumbhakarna replied laughing.

"While we were discussing earlier and taking decisions, that disaster foreseen by me has reaped for having not trusted the well wishers."

"Those who do sinful deeds fall unobstructed so also the fruit of your sinful action has come upon you."

"O king! All this action was not thought of at the beginning, nor the consequences of action weighed in the pride of your prowess."

"Confident of prosperity, he who defers action earlier, he does not know what is right and wrong later on."

" Actions performed without regard for time and place will be disastrous like the oblations offered into fire without consecration, gets wasted."

He who thinks with ministers and considers the five aspects of threefold duties and moves in the right path performs (Five aspects of action are the method of initiating action, material to be worked upon, time and place of action, provision against mischance and the chances of success). Threefold duties with reference to enemies are Sama, Daana, and Bedha."

"The king who does his duty in time in accordance with justice and thinking intelligently with his ministers, understands rightly."

"O Rakshasa king! A man should pursue his duty or worldly gain or sensual pleasures all the three combined or at least any two in time (the scriptures lay down that duty should be pursued in the morning, wealth in the afternoon and sensual pleasures at night)."

" A sovereign king or a king hearing these three does not recognize the best of the three is in vain even though he heard many."

"You are the foremost of the Rakshasas! After discussing with ministers, a king either by gifting or conciliation or dissension or resorting to all of them at the appropriate time takes resort to pursue virtue, wealth, or sensual pleasures at the right time, never meets with sorrow."

"That king who knows the reality of things and makes decisions in consultation with his ministers, who make their living with their intelligence will live happily."

"People whose intelligence level is no better than animals, who have been included to express their views, who do not know the meaning of shastras express their views out of impudence."

"Those who have no knowledge of shastras are ignorant of the science of wealth and desire huge wealth. Their advice ought not to be followed."

"Those who tender advice, which is unwholesome but in wholesome grab, out of their impudence should be kept away from discussion examining early as they mar the purpose."

"Some ministers in order to ruin the king, collide with enemies and make the king take wrong actions."

" A ruler should know those ministers bribed by the enemy, who have become close to the enemy and appear as friends. Those ministers must be known through their behaviour in the deliberations."

"Enemies find out the weakness of the king who is unsteady and rush after the actions forcibly without thinking like brahmins just as birds find the holes in Krauncha mountain and elaborate to others."

"He who knowing fully the actions of the enemy does not protect himself he attains reverses and is also dragged down from position."

"The advice given to you in the past by your brother alone is good. That is good for you. Or you may do what you wish."

Kumbhakarna having spoken that way, the ten headed Ravana frowned, shaking his eyebrows in anger and spoke this way.

"Why do you, who are worthy of respect, instruct me like a father or teacher? These words express your cleverness in speaking. It is time to do what is appropriate now. Follow what is to be done."

"Due to delusion, or lack of understanding or due to pride of my strength I did something. To talk of it now again is futile."

"You may speak of only what is proper to do now. Do not think of the past as it is gone."

"If at all there is any affection in you for me now, you recognize your strengths and think what action is justified in your heart. You may nullify the evil that sprung from my heart."

" A friend is one who helps when one's fortune is lost and is desperate. Deviating from morals the one who is prepared to help is a relation."

Thereafter knowing that Ravana is agitated and arguing in a grave and harsh manner, Kumbhakarna, spoke slowly in a gentle tone.

Sensing that Ravana is disturbed very much, Kumbhakarna taking hold of the brother and consoling him slowly said these words.

"Listen to my words, Rakshasa king! You are a scourge of enemies. Put aside this sorrow. Give up the agony also. Be normal. You ought to be your normal self again."

"While I am (my body is) with life you need not entertain despondency. I will exterminate him, by whose account you are agitated."

"O king! I will give you good advice in all circumstances being a relation. Salutary advice has been given to you out of brotherly affection."

" At this time, you will see a relation doing that which is right out of affection. All enemies will be destroyed."

"O mighty armed King! You see Rama along with his brother being killed by me and Vanaras fleeing away from the forefront of war."

"Be happy today, O Mighty armed brother! I will bring Rama's head from the battlefield. Sita will be sad. You will see."

" All the Rakshasas in Lanka whose relations have been killed will witness Rama's death which will be very welcome."

Now I will wipe the tears of Rakshasas who lost their kin and are bewailing their loss.

"Now you will see Sugriva the foremost of monkeys in mountain shape, resembling mountains bathed in blood like evening Sun illumined like the cloud."

"O Sinless Ravana! As I am going to kill this son of Dasaratha whom Rakshasas are intending to kill, how can Rama kill you now?"

"Rakshasa king! Raghava will kill you only after killing me. Never give way for distress."

"Command me to wage war at this moment, O Scorcher of enemies. There is no one better than me to be sought for O hero endowed with extraordinary strength."

"I shall exterminate your enemies, however mighty they may be. I can contend with Indra or fire god or Yama or wind god, Kubera or even Varuna."

"Even Indra with a body as big as a mountain, with pointed teeth like a spike, with sharp teeth will fear me and run if I roar.

"Or else giving up weapons and swords using my arms indeed I can crush, and no one can stand in front of me."

"I shall not fight with javelin or mace or sword or sharp arrows. Enraged, alone I can strike down even Indra."

"Now if that Raghava can withstand the force of my fists, you will see volleys of Rama's arrows will drink my blood."

"O King! while I am here for what reason do you worry and have anxiety? I will go now and decidedly destroy your enemy."

"O King! Give up the fear, as both Rama and Lakshmana will be made short of work in the battlefield, as also mighty Sugriva and dispose of Hanuman, the destroyer of many Rakshasas and who set fire to Lanka."

"I will remain steady in the battlefield and devour monkeys also. I wish to confer an unusual and great glory on you."

"Even if there is fear of Indra and Brahma that haunts you, I shall destroy them away like the sun dispels darkness. Devas will fall flat on earth when I am enraged."

"I shall quell Lord Yama also, devour fire god, make the Sun including stars fall on earth."

"I shall kill Indra who has done a hundred sacrifices, drink up the ocean the abode of Varuna, crush the mountains totally, and break the earth."

" All beings all over will be eaten now. For a long time Kumbhakarna was sleeping. Now you will see that the food of all the three worlds, earth, heaven and intermediate region will not be enough to fill my stomach."

"Through the destruction of Rama, I will bring happiness to you who are worthy of happiness. I will collect Rama along with Lakshmana and all the Vanara leaders and devour all."

"O King! Now you drink wine, give up agony and start with work. Now Rama will be going to the abode of Yama sent by me. Sita will submit to you for long."  ।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेष्टितमस्सर्गः ।।  This is the end of the sixty third sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.