Having heard Angada's words, the Vanaras of gigantic body firmly decided to wage war and returned back.

The Vanara leaders, having been reminded of their valour in battle by Angada gladly returned with a resolve to stake their life and carried on the battle.

Thereafter the Vanaras of huge body wielding huge trees and mountain peaks quickly rushed towards Kumbhakarna.

Valiant Kumbhakarna, a gigantic one, highly enraged lifted mace and crescent shaped arrow struck the enemies on all sides.

Kumbhakarna held seven or eight or even hundred, thousand vanaras and threw them on the ground like serpents thrown by Garuda.

Kumbhakarna became extremely angry, and caught hold of sixteen, eight, ten vanaras in the same way ninetynine and thirty and many more Vanaras and devoured them and went about like Garuda after having eaten the serpents.

The Vanaras collected from here and there, having restored confidence in themselves with great difficulty, held trees and mountains and stood in the forefront of the battle.

Thereafter Dwivida, a bull among the Vanaras lifted a mountain and went towards Kumbhakarna who resembled a threatening cloud.

Vanara (Dwivida) going near Kumbhakarna struck him with the mountain. He missed the target and it fell on his army.

The huge mountain peak crushed the horses, elephants and chariots and Rakshasa charioteers also.

The battlefield on which the Rakshasas and horses were crushed, charioteers were killed by the speed of the mountain remained wet with blood.

The Rakshasa charioteers severed the roaring Vanara leaders forcibly with their arrows emitting frightening sounds. They were like the Lord of Death at universal dissolution.

Great monkeys, uprooting huge trees, began to destroy chariots, horses, camels, and Rakshasas.

Stationed in the sky Hanuman rained mountain peaks, rocks, and huge trees of several kinds on the head of Kumbhakarna.

Mighty Kumbhakarna split off the rocks, mountain peaks and the trees breaking them.

Thereafter Kumbhakarna holding a sharp pike rushed towards Hanuman who uprooted a mountain peak and obstructed him placing it before him.

Enraged Hanuman struck Kumbhakarna endowed with a rock like frightening body. Overpowered by that blow Kumbhakarna was upset and bespattered with fat and got bathed in blood.

Kumbhakarna ,who was like a mountain blazing like fire, pierced at Maruti's chest with his pike shining like lightning just as Guha struck at Krauncha mountain.

The great son of windgod, pierced with pike in the chest, ejected blood from his mouth, and roared in a frightening manner which was like thunder rumbling at the time of dissolution of the universe.

Rakshasa's army collected together rejoiced to see Hanuman agonized. Vanaras were frightened and fled in fear of Kumbhakarna.

The mighty and wise Neela flung a peak of a mountain on Kumbhakarna and restored the confidence of the army.

(Kumbhakarna) observing the mountain peak coming towards him pierced it with his fist. Struck by the fist, the peak broke and sparks of fire came out shining brightly and fell on the ground.

Rshaba, Sarabha, Neela, Gavaksha and Gandhamadana, these five tigers among Vanaras attacked Kumbhakarna.

Those Vanaras of exceptional strength attacked gigantic Kumbhakarna on all sides by rocks, trees and by their fists, hands and feet also.

Their attacks were like soft touches to Kumbhakarna, and no pain was experienced by him, and he encircled Rshaba by the shoulders with great impetuosity.

Rshaba, the bull among Vanaras, of frightful appearance pressed by Kumbhakarna's shoulders, started bleeding from his teeth and fell down.

Angry Kumbhakarna (enemy of Indra) hit Sarabha with his fist, Neela with his knees hurt Gavaksha and slapped him with his palms. Gandhamadana was kicked with force.

Hurt by the blows of Kumbhakarna, their eyes bathed in blood, the Vanaras fainted and fell on the ground like cut down Kimsuka trees.

Being great leaders and the important among them fallen, the Vanaras went in thousands towards Kumbhakarna.

The bulls among Vanaras themselves looking like mountains endowed with great strength climbed up Kumbhakarna and bit him.

The bulls among Vanaras hurt Kumbhakarna, endowed with strong shoulders, by scratching with nails, biting with teeth and hitting him with arms and fists.

The tiger among Rakshasas covered with thousands of Rakshasas was resembling a mountain with trees grown on itself.

Holding the Vanaras, the mighty Kumbhakarna started devouring all Vanaras just as Garuda does with serpents.

As Kumbhakarna thrust Vanaras into his mouth, the Vanaras came out through his nostrils and also through his ears.

The foremost of the Rakshasas, who resembled a mountain became enraged and mutilated the Vanaras.

That terrible Rakshasa swooning and wetting the ground with flesh and blood ranged through the army of Vanaras like fire at the time of dissolution of the universe.

Holding pike in hand, mighty Kumbhakarna was shining in the battlefield like Indra holding thunderbolt, and like Lord of Death holding the noose.

Just as fire god consumes dried forest in summer, Kumbhakarna was consuming the Vanara army.

Then with the army killed, the Vanaras moved without any leader making unnatural sounds out of fear and anger.

Destroyed by Kumbhakarna in many ways, the Vanaras were heartbroken and sought the refuge of Raghava.

The son of Vali who sprung from Indra, the wielder of the thunderbolt seeing the Vanaras routed, rushed towards Kumbhakarna to assault.

Angada taking a huge peak of a mountain roaring again and again following Kumbhakarna frightening the Rakshasas flung the mountain top on the forehead of Kumbhakarna and crushed him.

Hit on the forehead by Angada, Kumbhakarna, burning with fury rushed. The intolerant Rakshasa then rushed to Vali's son with force.

Mighty Kumbhakarna agitated, making loud noise and frightening all the Vanaras hurled his pike on Angada.

Angada who was knowledgeable of warfare, endowed with prowess, a bull among Vanaras, stopped the pike approaching him with agility and escaped.

Jumping up that way, Angada slapped him with his palm on the chest in anger. By that the mountain like Kumbhakarna became unconscious.

The mighty Rakshasa regained his consciousness and, doubling his fist hit Angada with the back of his hand and Angada fell, lost senses.

When the tiger among the monkeys fell unconscious on ground, Kumbhakarna rushed towards Sugriva taking out the pike.

Valiant Sugriva, seeing the mighty Kumbhakarna coming towards him jumped (in excitement).

Sugriva, of great prowess lifting a mountain peak, whirled it round and round and darted towards Kumbhakarna swiftly.

Kumbhakarna, looking at the monkey Lord advancing towards him, stood in front of all limbs braced.

Sugriva spoke these words seeing Kumbhakarna who stood smeared with the blood of Vanaras and eating monkeys.

"Give up with Vanaras, who are monkeys by nature. Bear this one mountain's blow of mine."

Hearing the king of Vanara's words of courage and strength, the tiger among Rakshasas, Kumbhakarna spoke these words.

"O Vanara! You are the grandson of creator Brahma and son of Rksharaja, endowed with fortitude and so roaring like this."

On hearing Kumbhakarna's words, Sugriva forcibly discharged a mountain resembling a thunderbolt on the chest of Kumbhakarna.

Then the mountain peak dropped on the chest broke into pieces. Thereafter the monkeys were despaired, and Rakshasas roared in joy.

Struck with mountain peaks, the Rakshasa became furious, and his pride was hurt. He opened his mouth widely making loud noises, his pike glowing like lightning, turned the pike into circles and hurled at Sugriva to put an end to him.

Hanuman the son of windgod instantly seized Kumbhakarna with his arms, whose shaft was covered by chains and broke with both hands quickly.

Then a rejoiced monkey, resting the thousand bharas iron pike on his knee broke it.

Seeing the pike broken by Hanuman, the army of Vanaras rejoiced and roared repeatedly all over and rushed.

Rakshasa was dismayed and mellowed. The forest rangers rejoiced and roared like lions going round. Seeing the broken pike Vanaras applauded Hanuman.

That great soul, the Lord of Rakshasas seeing the pike broken in that way, was highly enraged. Taking Malaya Mountain from Lanka, he struck Sugriva who was approaching him.

Struck by the piece of mountain the Vanara king became unconscious and dropped on the battlefield. Seeing that the Rakshasas were happy and naturally roared with a feeling of triumph.

Kumbhakarna approaching the Vanara Lord Sugriva endowed with wonderful and dreadful prowess, went like wind carrying clouds taking him.

In the battlefield, the form of Kumbhakarna which resembled a huge cloud was distinguished in appearance like the lofty peak of mountain Meru.

Thereafter the heroic Rakshasa king having held Sugriva in the battle went, duly praised (by Rakshasas), hearing the roaring sounds of gods in heaven wondering at Sugriva's capture.

Then Kumbhakarna, an enemy of Indra, who was equal to Indra in heroism seizing Sugriva, the Indra of monkeys, who is equal to Indra, thought, 'If Sugriva is killed it is like killing all the army including Rama.'

Seeing the army running away here and there and Sugriva being captured by Kumbhakarna, wise Hanuman, the son of Maruti started thinking.

'Sugriva has been caught. What is my duty now? I will do what is just. I will destroy that Rakshasa who is in the form of a mountain', thought Maruti.

'Mighty Kumbhakarna shattered by my fist in a duel, and the king of Vanaras delivered, all the monkeys will be rejoiced.'

'Or else this Sugriva alone can get liberated by fighting by himself with gods, demons and Nagas also, even if he is captured'.

"I think that Sugriva, hit by Kumbhakarna with a mountain, has lost senses and is not able to know."

Sugriva will soon regain consciousness and do what is good for Vanaras.

"If Sugriva is released by me, he will not be happy forever. His fame will be lost."

"Therefore, I will see the exhibition of his prowess for a while. Thereafter I shall reinforce the scattered army of Vanaras."

Hanuman, the son of Maruti thinking in this way said to the Vanara army and brought determination.

Then Kumbhakarna taking the great Vanara who started to shake by then, entered Lanka through the roads of lofty mansions from where Rakshasas hailed showering flowers.

Exceptionally strong Sugriva with parched grain and fragrant water showered on him in the royal path, being cool, regained consciousness.

(Sugriva) being strong and painfully gained senses, from the arms of the great Rakshasa, started looking at the royal path of the city. He was bewildered and started pondering this way.

'Caught in this way, how can I do (take action)? I will do what is possible, pleasing, and good to Vanaras now.'

There after the king of Vanaras decided to act and tore off the ears of the enemy ruler of gods (Kumbhakarna) with his sharp nails, bit off the nose with his teeth, and sides of Kumbhakarna.

Deprived of ears and nose by Sugriva, splitting with nails and teeth, Kumbhakarna was highly furious and pinning down Sugriva pounded him against the ground, limbs bespattered.

Dropped on the ground by Kumbhakarna of dreadful strength, pressed against the ground surface, Sugriva bounced to the sky to get reunited with Rama.

Great hero Kumbhakarna, devoid of ears and nose drenched in blood shone like a mountain in springs.

Kumbhakarna of terrific valour and gigantic body, drenched in blood, dark in colour like a mountain of collyrium, resembling evening cloud, the night ranger went towards the battlefield.

Himself (Sugriva) gone, the enemy of the Lord of gods rushed again retreating, "I am ferocious, without weapon." Then seizing an iron mallet, Sugriva went reflecting.

The great Kumbhakarna then departing instantly entered into Vanara army consumed them as fire at dissolution consumed people.

Kumbhakarna started seizing principal monkeys in the same way as death at the end of universe. Being famished for flesh and blood he entered the Vanara army in delusion and consumed not only Vanaras but Rakshasas, demons and bears also.

Taking one, two, three, and many Vanaras along with Rakshasas hastily with one hand he was gulping them.

Then the mighty Kumbhakarna while being struck by peaks of mountains, he was feasting on Vanaras fat and blood oozing out from his mouth.

Being devoured by Kumbhakarna, the Vanaras went for refuge to Rama. Enraged Kumbhakarna followed the Vanaras behind.

Stretching his arms on all sides picking hundred, seven hundred, eight hundred and two hundred and three hundred, he ran devouring the vanaras.

His limbs smeared with fat and blood, with wreaths of entrails hanging on his ears, with sharp teeth, grown in his body to huge size, rained darts like the spirit of death at the end of the world.

At that time, Sumitra's son, Lakshmana, winner of enemy forces, conqueror of forts, enraged went to fight.

Valiant Lakshmana pierced seven arrows on Kumbhakarna's body and discharged many arrows on him.

Kumbhakarna having been tormented, put an end to the dart (of Lakshmana). Mighty Lakshmana there upon flew into a rage.

Then he covered Kumbhakarna's glittering golden shield with arrows just as the evening wind covered the cloud.

Adorned with golden ornaments (Kumbhakarna), covered with darts without being tormented he looked like a dark mountain shining like sun rays covered by clouds.

Thereupon the Rakshasa sounding like the rumblings of clouds disdainfully spoke these words to Lakshmana, the son of Sumitra.

"You have exhibited your valour without fear in battle, challenging me who has conquered even Lord of Death without difficulty in battle."

"He who is ready to face me, a rival of Lord of Death in conflict, with weapons in hand in great battle is worthy of honour to me."

"Indra mounted on the elephant, Airavata surrounded by all Devatas, indeed never stood before me in conflict."

"Now I am gratified with your valour, though young. Taking leave of you, I wish to go to Raghava."

"I am gratified by your valour, strength and enthusiasm which has been exhibited by you in the battle. However, I wish to kill Rama alone."

"When Rama has been put to an end by me in conflict, whoever remains can be struck down by my army."

When that Rakshasa made such boastful and dreadful statements in the battlefield, laughing heartily, Saumitri replied as follows.

"O Hero! that heroism you have acquired is irresistible even by Indra is true. Now your prowess has been witnessed. Rama stands here, immovable like a mountain."

Kumbhakarna of mighty strength, the night ranger hearing Lakshmana, rather disregarding his words, overlooking him went alone towards Rama as if shaking the earth.

Sri Rama, son of Dasaratha, now released a sharp arrow presided over by Rudra and fixed into the chest of Kumbhakarna.

As Rama hit in anger, at once fire mixed with flames shot forth from Kumbhakarna's mouth.

Pierced by Rama's missiles, the foremost of the Rakshasas, Kumbhakarna was very angry and rushed towards him dispersing all the vanaras in the battle.

Adorned by peacock's plumes, those arrows slipped into his breast, he lost senses, his mace naturally dropped down from his hand.

All his weapons scattered on the ground, the mighty Kumbhakarna deprived of weapons thought for himself and created havoc with his feet and fists.

Pierced by arrows excessively all over his limbs, bathing in blood flowing from the injury was like a mountain with a spring.

Kumbhakarna in violent anger, blood flowing from the injury, went about devouring Vanaras, Rakshasas and bears.

Thereupon, Kumbhakarna endowed with terrific valour like God of Death hurled towards Rama a mountain peak whirling it round which split.

Rama once again taking the bow, split the peak of the mountain with seven unfailing arrows on its way even before it reached the target.

The righteous Rama, a bull among men, taking his arrows adorned with gold split the peak of the mountain.

While falling down, Kumbhakarna was like Mount Meru, shining by his splendour was falling down and knocking down two hundred monkeys.

At that time, righteous Lakshmana who was attentively deliberating on many plans to kill Kumbhakarna, said to Rama.

"This king intoxicated with the smell of blood is not knowing his own people and foes and devouring both Vanaras and Rakshasas."

Let the bulls among Vanaras climb upon him and the foremost of Vanaras and the troops stand all over.

Distressed by heavy weight unable to get up evil minded Rakshasa fallen on the ground will not destroy monkeys.

Having heard the words of the wise Prince, the monkeys collected climbed on Kumbhakarna happily.

Enraged Kumbhakarna shook off the monkeys climbed on his body like a harsh elephant shakes off its rider.

Seeing the Vanaras shaken, Rama went towards the Rakshasa instantly and took out his best bow.

Raghava's eyes turned red with anger, went quickly in anger as monkeys and troop leaders oppressed by Kumbhakarna were rejoiced.

Rama, taking a formidable bow which resembled a great serpent, with a quiver full of excellent arrows shining in gold that looked beautiful, went forward restoring the confidence of the monkeys.

Mighty Rama, who is extremely difficult to win over, went with full conviction followed by Lakshmana and surrounded by vanara troops.

Great Rama, endowed with extraordinary might, saw Kumbhakarna, the tamer of enemies covered with blood and having red eyes.

Surrounded by Rakshasas, he was searching for Vanaras, like an elephant, guarding a quarter, searches.

(Kumbhakarna) Adorned with gold armlets, blood flowing from his mouth was like a rain cloud showering from Vindhya or Mandara mountain.

With blood red eyes, licking the corner of his mouth with his tongue, crushing Vanara army, he looked like God of Death at dissolution.

Seeing the foremost of Rakshasas, shining like fire, Rama, the bull among men stretched his bow.

Enraged by the loud sound of the twang of the bow, the bull among Rakshasas unable to bear rushed towards Raghava.

Thereafter Rama spoke to Kumbhakarna, whose hands were like Vasuki's body, coming towards him to attack on the battlefield like a cloud chased by wind.

"O king of Rakshasas! Come. Do not be despondent. I stand with my bow. In a moment I will destroy you. Look, the Rakshasa clan will be put to an end."

Knowing that this is Rama, Kumbhakarna laughed in an unnatural manner making a sound and ran after scattering the monkeys in great rage.

Highly energetic Kumbhakarna laughing in hideous ways making sounds like rumblings of clouds breaking the hearts of forest rangers spoke these words.

"I am not Viradha, not Vijeya, not Kabhanda, not also Vali or Maricha. I am Kumbhakarna and have come."

"See my terrible club made of wrought iron. By this I have won earlier Devatas and Danavas."

"Do not think I have been deprived of ears and nose and look with contempt. I do not have little pain."

"O Tiger of the Ikshvaku clan! Exhibit your manliness, prowess, and valour on me. I will eat you up later."

On hearing Kumbhakarna's words Rama was bewildered. He discharged plumed arrows at a speed of thunderbolt. Struck by the arrows the enemy of Devatas was not shaken or agonized.

Those arrows which had cut down the Sala trees and the Vanara leader, Vali, which were like thunderbolts, did not affect Kumbhakarna's body.

The enemy of Lord Indra drank the arrows through his body and hurled his club at great speed whirling it round and round arrested the arrows of Rama.

Then Kumbhakarna with his club covered with blood and frightening even the celestials scattered the monkeys.

Thereupon taking up the weapon of Wind God, Rama discharged on the night ranger and severed his right arm with the mace. His arm torn off, Kumbhakarna made uproarious noise.

Kumbhakarna's arm severed by Rama's arrow was like a mountain peak. It fell on Vanara army too and killed the monkey king's army.

Then the remaining Vanaras who escaped killing and mutilation went close feeling desperate and witnessed the comb at between Rama and Kumbhakarna.

One arm cut off, Kumbhakarna deprived of limb looked like a mountain with peak cut off. Thereafter he seized a palmyra tree and went towards Rama.

Then Rama yoking his bow with an arrow charged with Indra's mantra and decked with gold severed Kumbhakarna's arm which was like coils of serpent and held the palmyra tree.

Kumbhakarna who resembled a mountain, his arm severed turning round and round fell on trees, mountains, Vanaras and Rakshasas crushing them.

Perceiving Kumbhakarna with broken arms rushing towards him, Rama at once took a sharp moon shaped arrow and split his feet.

Both the feet falling on ground made a resounding noise that filled all over the four quarters, all directions, nay all mountains and caves of Trikuta and also Lanka.

Arms broken, feet cut off, dilating his mouth like fire, shouting aloud like Rahu entering moon in the sky he rushed to Rama speedily.

Rama filled the mouth of Kumbhakarna with his sharp and pointed gold encrusted arrows. Unable to speak the Rakshasa moaned and fainted.

Then Rama took up the effulgent sun beam like arrow with feathers and the destructive rod of Brahma and the Time spirit that was fatal to enemies that was fast as wind speed and charged with Indra's mantra.

Rama crushed the night ranger to pieces with his arrow encrusted with diamonds and gold, glowing like the Sun 's rays and fire which resembled Indra's thunderbolt, in speed.

Discharged from Rama's arm, the terrific weapon went just as the Lord of god's weapon, which was like Indra's thunderbolt burning like fire, shining by its brilliance and went in all directions and cut the head of Vritasura.

The arrow (of Rama) severed the head of Rakshasa king whose body was like a lofty mountain peak, whose teeth were large and protruded, hanging earrings shaking, just as Indra severed the head of Vritasura earlier.

The huge head of Kumbhakarna adorned with earrings was like the moon rising between the stars in the heaven at night presided by Aditi, the mother of twin gods.

Killed by Rama's arrow, that head of the Rakshasa, which was like a mountain had demolished the walls and houses and peaks of buildings.

The shining huge body of Rakshasa fell into the ocean crushing the other beings in the ocean like alligators, fishes and serpents that entered into the earth.

Kumbhakarna, the enemy of Brahmans and Devatas, having been killed, the Earth, all mountains, Devatas highly rejoiced.

Thereafter the celestial sages and other sages, serpents, Devatas and all beings including eagles and Guhyakas (airborne animals), Yakshas and Gandharvas rejoiced very much at Rama's valour.

Thereupon, the courageous kinsfolk of Ravana, resolute in mind, pained by the death of Kumbhakarna, feared the foremost of Raghus, just as elephants feared seeing the Lord of Devatas, and emitted loud cries.

Having killed Kumbhakarna, in the combat, Rama shone brilliantly just as Sun liberated from Rahu's mouth, after dispersing the darkness of the abode of Devatas.

Many Vanaras, with their faces resembling full blown lotuses joyfully laughed and worshipped Rama for getting rid of an enemy of terrific strength.

Sri Rama the brother of Bharata, the destroyer of celestial armies who had never been conquered in combat as Indra, the Lord of the heavens. Seeing that the Vanaras surrounded and roared in great joy at the death of Kumbhakarna.  ।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेसप्तषष्टितमस्सर्गः ।।  This is the end of the sixty seventh sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.