Seeing Kumbhakarna slain by the glorious Raghava, the Rakshasas informed Ravana, the king of Rakshasas.

"O King! Kumbhakarna, who was equal to the God of Death, devoured and won over the Vanaras, scattered the army, has joined death as a consequence of time (fate)."

"Your brother Kumbhakarna showed his might for a short time. But by virtue of Rama's energy and arrows, his mountainlike body was reduced to a trunk of dreadful appearance. Bleeding excessively, he was like a mass submerged in an ocean of blood. like a tree caught in forest fire he was blocking the gate of Lanka in ugly form with a head, nose and ears chopped off."

Hearing that Kumbhakarna of great strength was slain, Ravana immersed in grief became deluded and fell.

Hearing about uncle's destruction, the sons of Ravana, Devanthaka, Naranthaka, Trisira and Atikaya, roared aloud afflicted by grief.

Ravana's brothers, Mahodara and Mahaparsva were overtaken by sorrow on hearing about the unwearied action of Rama and slaying of Kumbhakarna.

Thereafter the foremost of the Rakshasas regained consciousness with great difficulty and awakened to the situation of Kumbhakarna's destruction, wailed disturbed in mind.

"Ha! Hero! Kumbhakarna! You, who crushed the pride of the enemy, endowed with great prowess have deserted me and gone to the abode of death, actually by divine will."

"O Kumbhakarna of extraordinary might! You have tormented the enemy army singlehanded with valour. You are going alone leaving me and the kinsfolk."

"I who depended on you like my right arm did not fear Devatas or Danavas and I am destroyed now."

"You, who crushed the pride of Devas and Danavas are equal to timespirit and death at dissolution and being a hero, how did you die in the hands of Raghava?"

"You are never affected by the strike of thunderbolt. How are you sleeping on the ground hit by Rama's arrows?"

"These Devatas and all sages are standing in the sky, seeing the battle and laughing aloud seeing your destruction."

"Having found an opportunity, all the Vanaras, highly rejoiced, on this very day, will surely climb over the gates of forts of Lanka determined."

"I have no purpose with the kingdom. What will I do with Sita? I have lost my life and mind with Kumbhakarna's death."

"If I do not kill Raghava who killed my brother in battle it is a waste of my life." Thus, thought Ravana.

"This very day, this very minute I shall reach the region where my brother died, I have no interest in life."

"Devatas who were harmed by me earlier will laugh at me now that Kumbhakarna is slain. How will I win Indra?"

"This calamity that has come upon me was because I have not taken such auspicious advice rendered by the great soul Vibheeshana."

"Thus, loss of both Kumbhakarna and Prahastha is dreadful. It is because of not following the words of advice of Vibheeshana totally. It hurts me."

"Righteous and prosperous Vibheeshana has been expelled by me earlier. By that action, I have obtained this grief."

﻿  Thus, the ten-headed, Ravana saddened by the destruction of his brother, an enemy of Indra, the Rakshasa king lamented profusely in many ways grieving and fell down, his mind agitated deeply.  ।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेआदिकाव्येश्रीमद्रामायणेयुद्धकाण्डेअष्टषष्टितमस्सर्गः ।।  This is the end of the sixtyeighth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana, composed by sage Valmiki.