Highly energetic Atikaya, who was like a mountain in form, had huge body, obtained boons from Brahma, subdued the pride of Devas and Danavas, was equal to Indra in valour. Seeing his own army of Rakshasas that caused horripilation, uncles who were bulls among Rakshasas struck down in the battlefield and his own brothers Yuddhotama (Mahodara) and Matta (Mahaparsva) struck down, he flew in rage.

Adorned with a crown, Ravana glowing like a thousand suns collected together mounted the chariot and darted towards Vanaras.

Adorned with crown, and polished earrings, twanging his bow, proclaimed his name and roared sounding aloud.

By that lionroar, and proclamation of his name (by the sound of the twang) frightening the Vanaras he struck terror.

Those Vanaras seeing the huge body thought, "This is Kumbhakarna, who has got up and come'. Out of fear, they sought the help of one another.

The Vanara troops, observing his form resembling the Trivikram form assumed by Vishnu, the monkey troops fled here and there in panic.

The Vanaras were deluded on reaching the huge body and went to Sri Rama to seek refuge.

Then Kakutstha saw from a distance form of huge body looking like a mountain, wielding bow, rumbling like a cloud at universal destruction.

Raghava the great, seeing the form of a huge body, was amazed, reassured by the Vanaras, and spoke to Vibheeshana.

"Who is he, the yelloweyed, resembling a mountain, seated in the broad chariot drawn by a thousand horses?"

"Who is he in the midst, with sharp tridents and shining spears, like Maheswara surrounded by beings?"

"Who is he, gleaming like the tongues of time spirit (Kala spirit), with flashes of javelins, encircled with lightning and looking like a cloud shining very bright?"

"His bows decorated with gold on the back, are like a rainbow in the sky on all sides and makes the chariot excellent."

"The tiger among the Rakshasas seated in the chariot is the foremost car warrior. He is illuminating the battlefield like the brightness of the Sun, resplendent like Sun 's rays. By his arrows he is illuminating the ten directions. The Rahu emblem on top of the pole of the chariot is very splendid."

"His bow with three curves, covered with gold, decorated, is close to a thundering cloud, casting its splendour."

"His chariot with standard, flag and axletree is a great one driven by four charioteers emitting sound like the rumblings of clouds."

"This chariot has twenty quivers, ten frightening bows, and eight bow strings of golden colour lay arranged in the chariot."

"It has two swords off our cubits and ten cubits long swords provided with hilts hanging on its sides as decoration."

"Wearing red garland s round the neck, brave, like a mountain in form, dark with large mouth, like death, like sun veiled by clouds he seems."

"By adorning armlets, his both arms are like high peaks of Himalaya mountain shining away."

"He who shines like the full moon between two Punarvasu stars, his auspicious eyes and countenance shines with both earrings."

"Oh! Vibheeshana, a mighty armed one! Show me that foremost of Rakshasas, whom all Vanaras feared and fled in all directions."

Interrogated by the highly brilliant prince Raghava, energetic Vibheeshana revealed.

"The tenheaded and highly brilliant king Ravana, who is the brother of Vysravana, is of terrible deeds and highly exploitative."

"To him was born a blessed son, valiant one, compeer of Ravana, who served elders, learned and well versed in sastras."

"He is best in riding on horseback, on elephant back and in the use of sword and bow. He is capable of sowing dissension, making peace, giving charity and statecraft."

"He is known as Atikaya, son of Dhanyamalini. Lanka remains fearless on his shoulders, you may know."

"By penance on supreme self he propitiated Brahma, who blessed him with mystic missiles by way of boons by which his enemies were subdued."

"Exemption from death from gods and demons was given to him and all this wonderful shield and chariot as bright as the sun."

"By this (boon) hundreds of Devatas and demons were defeated by him, Yakshas were killed, nay Rakshasas were protected."

"Here is strong Atikaya, a wise son of Ravana, bull among Rakshasas, who is a subduer of the pride of Devas and Danavas, by whom thunderbolt of Indra was obstructed firmly in battle and likewise the noose of Varuna was repelled in war."

"Oh, best of men! Quickly make efforts to put an end to him before he puts down Vanara army."

Thereafter, mighty Atikaya entered the monkey army, twanged his bow again and again and made a loud noise.

Observing the dreadful enemy seated on the chariot, the foremost of the great Vanaras rushed towards him.

Kumuda, Dwivida, Mainda, Neela, even Sarabha, all at once assailed him with trees and mountain peaks.

Atikaya, endowed with extraordinary energy, efficient in the use of weapons, shattered the trees and rocks hurled by the Vanaras with his arrows adorned with gold.

The powerful night ranger of terrible form, pierced all monkeys who were facing him in the battlefield with iron arrows.

The monkeys were hard pressed by Atikaya's hail of arrows. Their limbs broke and were unable to resist.

Just as a young lion with youthful pride would strike a group of deer, the enraged Rakshasa struck the army of monkey heroes.

The Rakshasa lord, wielding a weapon in the midst of the monkey army, indeed did not strike any, but armed with bow and quiver went with pride towards Rama and spoke.

"I am with a bow and arrow seated in the chariot. Indeed, I am not strong in fighting with common warriors. Whoever is interested to fight now can come speedily to fight with me."

On hearing Atikaya, Saumithri the destroyer of enemies, became angry, not enduring and not able to tolerate went towards him taking a sword.

Furious Saumithri, springing up, took up his arrow from the quiver, stretching to full length before he discharged the arrow.

The twang of Lakshmana filled the mountains, earth, ocean, and all directions striking terrible fear in the night ranger.

Then the extraordinarily energetic and powerful son of Rakshasa king was in turn frightened at the sound of Saumithri's bow and was astonished.

Seeing Atikaya, furious Lakshmana sprang up and took a sharp shaft and spoke as follows.

"O Saumithri! You are valiant but young, not able to discriminate. I am equal to the Lord of death. Why do you desire to comb at with me?"

The shafts discharged from my arm can't be borne, by the Himalayas, even the atmosphere between the sky and earth can't bear the force.

"Why do you want to arouse the fire of dissolution sleeping comfortably? Return, casting away your bow, without confronting. Go away."

"Or else if you want to oppose and not return, give up your life and proceed to Yama's abode."

"See my sharp shafts capable of reducing enemy's pride like Ishwara's trident, ornamented with polished gold."

"These arrows are like serpents and can drink your blood just as an angry lion drinks the blood of elephants. Therefore, I tell you", said Atikaya to Lakshmana."

Prince Atikaya, having spoken as said before, fitted his bow in wrath. Hearing the proud statement of Atikaya, the highminded Lakshmana, endowed with strength, enraged, and spoke these words of great meaning.

"You are evil minded. By mere statement you people can't become good chiefs. I stand armed with a bow and arrow. Prove your strength."

"Reveal yourself by action not by indication. You do not deserve it. He who is with prowess is a right hero."

"You are seated in the chariot with all kinds of weapons collected. By that alone you do not become capable. Show your capacity."

"Then I will strike down his head with sharp arrows and throw him just as ripened palm fruit drops in the process of time."

"Now, you will drink the blood ejected from your neck by the holes made with my pointed arrows decked with polished gold."

"You should not underestimate me thinking I am young or old to win. You do not know that I am spirit of death in battle. Did not Vishnu as young Trivikrama win the three worlds going by three strides?"

On hearing the words of Lakshmana, which was reasonable and full of truth, Atikaya became furious and took up the best of arrows.

Then vidhyadharas, demons, devatas, daityas, sages and great guhyakas arrived at the battlefield to witness.

Then enraged Atikaya, fixing his arrow to the bow as if discharging it in the sky directed at Lakshmana.

Lakshmana, the heroic destroyer of enemies, shattered the venomous serpent like arrow with his sharp half moon shaped arrow.

Seeing the arrow torn asunder like a serpent, Atikaya was offended and became very angry and fitted five arrows to his bow.

The night ranger set loose those arrows at Lakshmana, Bharata's brother. Lakshmana shattered them even before it reached him.

Lakshmana, the heroic destroyer of foes, having split those arrows, seized a shaft which was a bright and sharp flaming arrow.

Valiant Lakshmana, foremost of the wielders of bow stretching his bow till the ear, quickly discharged the arrow.

The heroic Lakshmana fully stretching the arrow bending to curvature struck Atikaya, the foremost of Rakshasas on his forehead.

That arrow stuck on the forehead of the terrific Rakshasa looked like a serpent on a mountain.

Now tormented by Lakshmana's arrow the Rakshasa was shaken dreadfully like the gate of Tripura (the city built of gold, silver, and iron in heaven, in space and earth by Maya and burnt by Rudra).

Recovering from the hurt and reflecting, the Rakshasa contemplated the course of action, and said 'By releasing the arrow on me you are an enemy worthy of praise."

Having spoken that way bending his face setting both shoulders right, he settled at the rear end of the chariot started to move from the chariot.

The bull among the Rakshasas taking, one, three, five and seven arrows, fixing them to the bow stretching released.

The gold feathered arrows released from the rakshasas's bow, were like death arrows which shone in the sky as if the sky was glowing.

Raghava's brother remained unconfounded and then he shattered the volley of many sharp arrows released by the Rakshasa.

Ravana's son, an enemy of Indra, observing that all arrows have been ineffective, took up another sharp arrow.

Highly energetic Atikaya, fixing another arrow released it between the breasts of Saumithri and pierced.

In the battle, Saumithri was hurt in the chest by Atikaya's arrow and blood flowed like the ichor from elephant in rut.

He (Lakshmana) being glorious and noble himself seized hold of the pointed arrow stuck in his body and removed it with a mystic spell.

Then Lakshmana by concentration of his mind fixed on fire god which presided over the arrow, that great selffixed in his bow glowed.

Highly energetic Atikaya took a serpentlike arrow with gold feathers and charged it by the concentration of his mind on the power of Sun god.

Lakshmana placed that fierce, glowing missile looking like the staff of God of death on Atikaya.

The night ranger, seeing the missile charged with fire god coming towards him, released the glowing arrow charged with the power of Sun god.

Both the arrows effulgent, flaming with fire, were like angry serpents in the sky striking one another violently.

Those two burning one another and themselves burning had fallen on the earth surface with no fire. Those two best of arrows though glowing, having fallen on earth did not shine as they ceased to emit flames and had been reduced to ashes.

Then Atikaya seized with anger discharged Ishikam presided over by Twashta (the architect of gods). Saumithri then split the arrow with one presided by Indra and split Ishikam.

Annoyed by his arrow Ishikam being struck, Atikaya, son of Ravana charged Lakshmana's arrow with an arrow presided over by Yama.

Then the night ranger shattered the arrow of Lakshmana and in turn released an arrow presided by Vayu.

And then enraged Lakshmana covered with water like a rainy cloud would shower with torrents.

On those arrows touching Atikaya's diamond like body, the pointed arrows shattered the coat covering the body and the broken coat of nails had fallen down.

Lakshmana of great fame, subduer of enemy looking at the arrows becoming useless mighty hero released thousand arrows.

Though covered with arrows showered on him, mighty Rakshasa Atikaya had an impenetrable shield in the battlefield and could not feel the torment.

Atikaya released an arrow resembling a poisonous serpent at Lakshmana. Pierced in vital part Saumithri, the tormentor of the enemy lost consciousness for a while.

Then mighty subduer of enemies, regaining senses, getting up destroyed the chariot pole with rain of arrows. Taking up four best arrows he struck down the chariot, charioteer, and the horses.

Saumithri, son of Sumithra, was not able to inflict injury on that Rakshasa with those arrows, though desiring to kill him.

Wind god (Vayu) having come to the best of men, Lakshmana, spoke to him that in battle it is not possible to injure him or kill him.

By the boon given by Brahma his body is covered with armour which can't be broken. By Brahma's weapon only you can strike to kill him because of his armour and might. By any other weapon it is not possible to kill him.

Then Saumithri who is equal to Indra hearing wind god's words invoked Brahma's weapon into service. While he was charging into his arrows and fixing the arrow went at terrific speed.

As Saumithri charged the sharp pointed foremost arrow, the directions, moon, Sun and other planets and the sky, earth, and all space shook.

Golden feathered arrow, which resembled thunderbolt, was released on Atikaya, enemy of Indra for whom it was like a messenger of death. It was charged with Brahma's mystic by Saumithri and released on fixing it.

Atikaya saw the arrow of Lakshmana coming at a speed, which possessed the velocity of the wind, fixed with feathers resembling the wings of Garuda in the battle.

As Atikaya was looking at the arrow, Lakshmana struck many arrows forcibly with sharp arrows possessing the speed of Garuda. The arrows reached towards Atikaya.

Perceiving the glowing arrow coming, like the spirit of death, Atikaya struck it with unceasing effort with javelins, spears, maces, axes, tridents and even arrows.

This great arrow of Lakshmana glowing like fire rendered the weapons in wonderful shapes released by Atikaya unsuccessful and severed the head of Atikaya decked with a crown.

Struck by Lakshmana's arrow, the crowned head of Atikaya fell on the ground like Himalaya peak.

All the Rakshasas who escaped from killing, felt distressed seeing the king and his ornaments scattered on the ground.

All the Rakshasas with desperate looks, their pride hurt, became very sad and burst into discordant tones roared aloud.

With Leader killed, the night rangers were afraid. Listless they ran quickly towards Lanka.

Enemy who was difficult to approach and of terrible might being killed, the Vanaras were extremely delighted. Their faces looked like lotuses in bloom. Filled with joy they worshipped Lakshmana.

Having killed that highly mighty Atikaya, who was like a mass of cloud, in battle, Lakshmana having been worshipped by hosts of Vanaras, hurriedly went to Rama's presence.  ।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेएकसप्ततितमस्सर्गः ।।  This is the end of the seventy first sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.