The bulls among Vanaras heard the roar which was like thunder and looking at Indrajith fled in all directions.

Thereafter, Maruti's son, Hanuman said to all Vanaras who were looking sad, piteous, feeling singly out of fear, and running away.

"O monkeys! Why have you lost enthusiasm to fight, looking sad and running away? Where has your valour gone?"

"Return and come in front, close to me and follow me. It is not proper for you to win wars and be praised."

Wise son of wind god having spoken in that way, delighted in mind the Vanaras seized peaks of mountains and also trees in great fury.

Surrounding Hanuman, the Vanara leaders followed him for a great fight.

Hanuman went surrounded by Vanara leaders who resembled flaming fire and began to consume the enemy troops like flaming fire.

The Vanara army surrounded that great monkey, Hanuman, who was like Yama, the god of death and caused havoc to Rakshasas.

Hanuman, overtaken by anger, filled with great sorrow hurled a huge rock at the chariot of Ravana's son.

Then seeing that rock coming towards the chariot yoked to obedient horses, the chariot rider drove it to a long distance.

That rock hurled by Hanuman failed to reach the chariot in which Indrajith was seated and also the charioteer. It cleaved the earth and entered.

As the rock fell on the battlefield the Rakshasa troops got alarmed and were violently crushed to death.

Those gigantic forest dwellers in hundreds seizing trees and rocks lifted and fought making loud noise.

Courageous Vanaras, innumerable in number began to rain trees and rocks throwing on the enemies. The Rakshasas number rolled on the battlefield shouting in numerous tones.

Night rangers of dreadful appearance beaten up with trees by most fierce Vanaras, fell on the battlefield and struck one another.

Indrajith, looking at his own army tormented by the Vanaras, was enraged, and went towards the enemies' seizing weapons.

Indrajith of unyielding valour, combining with his own army let go numerous arrows on the tigers of Vanaras and struck them.

In the battle, followers of Indrajith struck the Vanaras with tridents, asanis, swords, sharp edged spears, and kutamudgaras.

Hanuman, who was endowed with great strength, killed Rakshasas capable of terrific tasks with trees having large trunks and branches and stones also.

Hanuman made the enemy army retreat, and spoke to his own army," No use of defeating this army for us as our mission is not winning the army."

"To please Rama, we are giving up life. Let us make Rama know that the daughter of Janaka for whose sake we are fighting this war and giving up life has been killed."

"On telling this fact (that Indrajith has killed Sita) to Rama and Sugriva and knowing their reply we will do what is to be done."

The foremost of the Vanaras, kept back all the Vanaras after speaking that way to the army and slowly and slowly retreated.

Thereafter, observing Hanuman going to Raghava, the evil minded Indrajith went to Nikumbhilam desiring to offer oblations at the sanctuary.

Indrajith reaching Nikumbhilam, the sacrificial ground, poured oblation of blood into the sacrificial fire for Devatas and the fire blazed.

The flame had swollen up with the offering of blood as oblation and risen. It was very bright and wrapped in the flames the fire resembled the sun.

Thereafter, Indrajith, with Rakshasas well versed with traditions, poured offerings into the sacrificial fire, as great Rakshasa gathering seated there were watching.  ।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेद्व्यशीतितमस्सर्गः ।।  This is the end of the eighty second sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.