Hearing the great noise of war between Rakshasas and Vanaras, Rama said to Jambavantha.

"O gentle Jambavan! The terrifying sound of weapons is heard. Surely Hanuman has done a difficult task."

"O King of Bears! Accompanied by your army, go to the battlefield and help the best of monkeys."

Rama having spoken thus, King of Bears surrounded by Vanaras went to Hanuman at the western gate.

Then the Lord of Bears saw Hanuman accompanied by Vanaras who fought in war coming sighing.

Hanuman seeing the terrific army of Bears marching like a dark cloud asked them to return and he also returned with them.

Hanuman of great fame accompanied by army quickly came to Rama and submitted as follows.

"Ravana's son, Indrajith struck Sita, who was crying in front of us looking at us while we were fighting in war."

"O Tamer of enemies! Seeing her (Sita) bewildered in mind, worried, I have come to inform you accompanied by Vanaras."

On hearing, Hanuman's words Raghava became deluded in sorrow and fell on the ground like a tree cut at the root.

Seeing Raghava who is equal to god fallen on the ground, and the best of monkeys lifting him, the Vanaras from all over came jumping.

Reaching Rama, who was like a burning fire that has risen up and suddenly fallen, the Vanaras sprinkled water with fragrance of lotuses and lilies on Rama just as sprinkling water on an inextinguishable fire that has flared up suddenly.

Then, Lakshmana who was very worried held the arms of Rama who was unwell and spoke these meaningful words.

"O Noble Rama! If You, who have gained over senses and sticking to a virtuous path are not protected, from this calamity by righteousness, then righteousness is useless."

" As animate and inanimate beings are seen experiencing joy at present, righteousness is not the cause of joy, I think so."

"Just as inanimate beings which are seen happy and animate are also seen in the same manner, in which case that righteousness alone prospers is not there (for a person like you would not suffer). Knowing this you should not suffer."

"If there is unrighteousness, Ravana should be in hell. You who are endowed with righteousness should not have agony."

" As Ravana has no sorrow and you have experienced agony the contraries of each other have changed the roles of righteousness and unrighteousness."

"The righteous attains the benefit through righteous means, and the unrighteous suffer by unrighteous means. If unrighteousness is rooted in the unrighteous and are pleased with unrighteousness they will be deprived of the result of righteousness. It is not otherwise."

"Since those rooted in unrighteous develop and are wealthy, and those who follow dharma suffer both these are meaningless."

"Righteousness and unrighteousness are forms of actions, sinful or not sinful. If sinful action is unrighteous, those who have done sinful actions should suffer. Since sinful action is momentary, and as soon as the action is over unrighteousness is also gone. That being so how can unrighteousness cause pain to anyone?"

"Or else if a man is destroyed by killing another, destiny which is engendered by the sinful action suffers and not the doer of sinful action."

"O Crusher of enemies! How does righteousness get encountered? It is not seen. How to know whether it is real or unreal? Is it possible to know that the best result is attained by righteousness."

"O foremost among the victorious! To you, who are a jewel no evil should accrue. Since such difficulty has been faced by you, the fact that good actions result in good destiny is not true."

"Or else dharma becomes feeble, ineffective, submits to might, then it is better not to follow such dharma which is feeble, I think."

"Giving up predominance of virtue, seek courage and submit to might for succeeding in action. Seek might just as you have sought dharma earlier for success."

"O scorcher of enemies! If you consider speaking the truth is dharma, why did you not bind your father (who promised to give the kingdom) and was not compassionate (spoke untruth later)."

"Indra killed an ascetic (Viswarupa) and did fire sacrifice. If dharma alone is his duty, he could have done hundreds of fire sacrifices and not have killed the ascetic. If adharma is duty he would have killed the ascetic and not done fire sacrifice."

"Kakuthsa Rama! Kings followed dharma and adharma both according to context. Whether following dharma or adharma destruction is happening. Therefore, humans keep doing both as per their desire."

"Dear Raghava! In my opinion also depending on desire and context, following dharma or adharma is proper. You have severed the roots of dharma by giving up the kingdom."

"Prosperity is augmented gradually and developed by all means just as rivers flow from mountains, all undertakings follow conducive to success."

"Just like streams dry up in summer, if one who is of meagre intelligence and forsakes wealth, all his actions will be interrupted."

"If one who has been happy seeks happiness on renouncing wealth then proceeds to perform sinful actions it is a mistake."

"Friends gather round him in whom riches abide. Relations stand by him who has wealth. He is considered manly in whom wealth abides, and he is learned who has wealth."

He is gallant to whom wealth has flown, he is intelligent in whom wealth abides, he is glorious in whom wealth exists and he is superior in great virtues in whom wealth found receptacle.

'If you give up wealth the evils will follow you', said I. Now you left the kingdom. The basis on which you made such a resolve is not known to me.

For one who has wealth all his actions of dharma would give pleasure and favourable. One who has no wealth and is worrying about it can't attain it.

"O Rama! Desire, delight, pride, virtue, anger, forgiveness, fortitude all these are effective through wealth."

"Even if there is wealth if one renunciates wealth and follows dharma in this world they perish like planets on cloudy days."

"O heroic Rama! You have been faithful to the promise to your father and left home following dharma (giving up wealth), and your dear wife who is your life has been abducted by Rakshasa."

"Get up, heroic Raghava! I will get rid of the agony caused to you by Indrajith, by the action."

"O tiger among men! O broad shouldered endowed with fortitude! Why do you not know yourself that you are a great soul and doer of action?"

"O sinless one! After considering the destruction of Janaka's daughter, in my anger and out of my love to you, I have spoken to you in this manner. I shall destroy Lanka, with its charioteer, elephants and horses, Rakshasa king immediately with my arrows."  ।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेअदिकव्येयुद्धकाण्डेत्ऱ्यशीतितमस्सर्गः ।।  This is the end of the eighty third sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.