Body having auspicious marks, smeared with blood, Lakshmana experienced the joy of having won Indra in battle.

Then Valiant and mighty Lakshmana called Jambavantha, Hanumantha, all the Vanaras, following Vibheeshana and Hanuman quickly reached Sugriva and Raghava.

Thereafter Saumithri went close to Rama and offered prayers, like Indra's brother Upendra and stood close to his brother.

Then heroic Lakshmana coming close to the great selfRaghava, in shaking tone (being tired) reported" Indrajith is killed."

Then Vibheeshana gladly informed Rama that Ravana's son's head had been severed by great Lakshmana.

As soon as Lakshmana said that Indrajith was killed, Rama was very glad and immediately spoke as follows.

"Well done, Lakshmana! I am glad. A difficult deed has been done. By the fall of Indrajith success has been achieved."

Bending the head of Lakshmana, a valiant one and enhancer of glory, who was shy of praising him, Rama lovingly, forcibly drawing him onto his lap and making him sit on examined again and again the wounded body and looked at him.

Lakshmana, a bull among men, body tormented by arrows, immersed in pain, breathing heavily. Rama stroking him, restoring his confidence, quickly spoke as follows.

"You have done an extremely beneficial task which is difficult for others to do. I think Ravana is killed in the battle with your action of killing Indrajith."

'Ravana was depending on Indrajith indeed. Now by that a great action of severing his right hand in comb at by Vibheeshana and Hanuman, I consider victorious.'

'Hero! In three days and nights indeed, you have made short of Indrajith. Hearing that Ravana's son has been made short of, Ravana will come now with large army troops.'

'On hearing of his son's death, the Rakshasa Lord will come forth with a huge army. Turning towards him I will put an end to him.'

Lakshmana, with you as my protector and Indra's enemy killed, neither Sita nor earth will be difficult to get back.

Rama, the celebrated scion of Raghu dynasty, restored the confidence of Lakshmana and embraced him happily. He invited Sushena and spoke as follows.

"O very wise Sushena! Treat Saumithri in such a way that this Lakshmana, loved by friends pained by the arrows pierced, will be relieved."

"Let Vibheeshana and Saumithri be treated quickly. Let all the army of Bears and others who fought with trees, and the heroes be treated. Let all others who fought in the battlefield and wounded be also healed by your effort and make them happy."

Spoken by Rama in that manner, the great Vanara leader, Sushena gave supreme medicine to Lakshman through his nose.

He then inhaled the fragrance and got freed from arrows, the pain of wounds and restored to normal state.

Then by Rama's order Vibheeshana and other friends and all Vanara leaders were healed.

Then Saumithri, freed from arrows, relieved from pain, anguish gone in a moment, and naturally restored, was happy.

At that time, Rama, also the monkey leader, and Vibheeshana, Jambavan with their army seeing Lakshmana getting up, free from wounds were full of joy.

Rama, the great son of Dasharatha, praised Lakshmana and others for the very difficult deed performed by them. Vanara leaders were very happy with the victory over Indrajith struck down and fallen.  ।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेद्विनवतितमस्सर्गः ।।  This is the end of the ninety second sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.