"Rama who can work without getting tired put an end to thousands of Rakshasa warriors with his sharp glowing arrows decked with gold. Thousands of warriors sent by king Ravana, mounted on chariots, yoked to horses, of the colour of fire, thousands of warriors who could wage with iron bars, decked in gold, mounted on colourful chariots of golden colour pictures and Rakshasas who can change their form at will, were destroyed by Sri Rama."

"On seeing and hearing of the others left over, the night rangers felt bewildered and piteous with agony coming together, moving in groups, those who lost husband, son, kin and protectors along with associates crying, stricken with grief."

"How did that old, dreadful and hideous Surpanakha approach Rama, whose form is charming like the god of love, in the forest?"

"That woman of ugly appearance deserves to be killed. How is it that she was stung with love with that delicate Rama, a well wisher of all beings?"

"How did that rakshasi of terrible appearance dare to love that virtuous Rama?"

"Because of our bad luck and to the destruction of her own people, Khara and Dooshana, that old lady, with wrinkled face, grey haired (Surpanakha) Rakshasa woman tried to go and attack Raghava, a misdeed which was ridiculed and condemned by the whole world?"

"For that reason of Surpanakha, this enmity has been conceived by Ravana and Sita was borne away by the ten headed Rakshasa."

"Hope the ten headed Ravana will not touch Sita forcibly, by which undying enmity has been contracted already."

"On perceiving that Viradha solicitous of Vaidehi, the Rakshasa was killed by Rama with one arrow. That is sufficient proof (of Rama's valour)."

" At Janasthana fourteen thousand Rakshasas have been destroyed with his arrows like peaks of fire."

"Khara was killed in that combat with sunlike arrows, so also Dooshana and Trisira. That example is sufficient proof."

"Kabhanda who lived on blood came roaring, enraged, whose arms were eight meters long was also killed and that is a sufficient example."

"Mighty Rama killed the son of thousand eyed Indra, Vali, who resembled mountain Meru. That example is sufficient proof."

"Sugriva, who was living on Rishyamukha, dejected and disconsolate was restored with his kingdom. That is sufficient."

"Good advice given by Vibheeshana in accordance with righteousness was not liked by him in delusion."

"Had Ravana, the younger brother of Kubera followed the advice of Vibheeshana, this Lanka would not have been stricken with grief and turned into a crematorium."

"Kumbhakarna of extraordinary strength having been killed by Raghava, and even on hearing that Atikaya who is difficult to disregard, and Indrajith, dear son killed by Lakshmana also, Ravana has not realised."

"My son is killed, my brother is killed, my husband is killed," was the sound heard from every family.

"Horses, elephants, warriors, even foot soldiers were killed, chariots were destroyed, and hundreds and thousands struck down in war by Rama."

"Is it Rudra, or Lord Vishnu, or Indra, who has done hundred sacrifices in the past or is it that the god of death itself has taken the form of Rama and killed him?"

"Eminent heroes killed by Rama, hopes of life lost, not able to see the end of fear, we are like orphans weeping."

"Graced with the boon of arrows the tenheaded Ravana has not realised the appalling danger to him from Rama."

"Neither gods nor Gandharvas, not even fiends will be able to protect, struck by Rama in war."

"In every war evil portents are noticed rising up, of Rama destroying Ravana. How much more to say?"

"Brahma has lovingly provided protection to Ravana from Devas, Danavas and Rakshasas. He did not seek protection from humans."

"Fearlessness of death from human beings attained by Ravana in this way was no doubt terrific to Rakshasas and Ravana."

"Tormented by the oppression of Ravana, on account of the boon (given to him by the creator) and intensity of his austerities, the learned worshipped Brahma."

"Gratified by the worship of Devatas, wishing them good, Brahma spoke these words."

"From now ,all Danavas and Rakshasas will range the three worlds every day permanently in fear."

"Getting together all the Devatas marched towards Indra and propitiated Lord MahaDeva, destroyer of Tripura, who Bears the sign of bull on his abode."

MahaDeva was pleased by the Devatas and spoke these words for their benefit," a woman will be born for the destruction of Rakshasas."

"Just as hunger consumed Danavas earlier, this woman, instigated (by Devatas) will consume all Rakshasas and Ravana."

"Because of the misconduct of the evilminded Ravana's immoral action, terrific destruction attended by grief stares at us."

"Threatened like this by Raghava, we cannot perceive anyone in this world who can protect us now. Just as beings are threatened by the time spirit at the end of the destruction of this world, we are threatened."

"Indeed, there is no protection for us here to stay, as we are like the female elephants in the forest covered by huge wildfire."

"Great Vibheeshana of the Paulastya race, perceiving opportune time, has sought refuge out of fear."

All the night rangers tormented by fear, holding one another, many of them cried aloud making loud noises, in a frightful manner out of despondency.  ।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेपञ्चनवतितमस्सर्गः ।।  This is the end of the ninety fifth sarga of the Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.